Written by Ella Hodder:


See full report sent to Gelatex here (EH):  
  
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1lbMQuZzhKH_UCLx-4MxLNtPORNpDMRxUke6VAQktvqE/edit?usp=sharing


Written by Lily Logan:
Quick summary of main findings


  1. Both zein and gelatin scaffolds supported prolonged cell adhesion (up to day 14 in E6 media). On day 14 in differentiation media the gelatin scaffolds appeared to have a higher confluence than zein scaffolds , however the difference was not significant (77.05 ± 12.21% vs. 69.5 ± 13.07%, P = 0.0583). 
  2. Neither scaffold type revealed any Myosin Heavy Chain (MF20) or myogenin (MyoG) positive cells after immunostaining on day 14 of differentiation. 
  3. Zein scaffolds were brittle in their dried form, and became very tearable and soft in cell culture conditions (growth media, 37'C, 5% CO2).
  4. Gelatin scaffolds swelled considerably in cell culture conditions (growth media, 37'C, 5% CO2), which negatively impacted the reliability of imaging due to scrunching. 


Discussion


Upon cutting the dried scaffold sheets to size for the 96-well plate, it was
identified that the zein scaffolds were far more brittle and prone to tearing
than the gelatin scaffolds. Once added to media, the gelatin scaffolds
immediately swelled to roughly 1.5 times their original size, causing them to
bunch up in the 96-well plate. This made focusing difficult during imaging, as
the scaffolds did not lay flat against the base of the plate (Figure 1).

On day 1, seeding efficiency calculations suggested that cells initially
adhered more strongly to scaffolds when seeded wet rather than dry (Table 1).
The scaffolds were stained with Hoechst and imaged using the Main Lab Zaber,
however the images were lost so no confluence analysis could be performed on
D1 images.

Figure 1: Gelatin scaffold bunched up in well due to expansion in cell culture
conditions.



On Day 7, the scaffolds were again stained with Hoechst and imaged using the
Main Lab Zaber. The images obtained of the zein scaffolds showed no
fluorescent particles, suggesting a complete absence of cells left adhered
(Figure 2). The gelatin scaffolds were taken at two different exposures due to
an error with imaging. Images with shorter exposure time were too dark to
detect any cells (Figure 3). The gelatin scaffolds imaged using a longer
exposure time revealed that there were, in fact, still cells adhered to the
gelatin scaffolds (Figure 1). The scaffolds were therefore kept in culture for
a further 7 days to assess confluence and prolonged adhesion. Day 7 scaffold
confluence was not analysed through JMP due to insufficient data for
statistical significance.

On Day 14, the scaffolds were fixed with 4% PFA and stained with DAPI nuclear
stain. They were imaged using the main lab Zaber microscope. Although exposure
was set to a similar time as for Day 7 samples (9 ms vs 5 ms), both zein and
gelatin scaffolds were seen to be confluent with many cells still adhered
(Figure 4, Figure 5). This suggested that Hoechst does not fluoresce as
strongly as DAPI, and therefore may not be as robust a method for identifying
cells on scaffolds.

Day 14 images were manually scored by LL and EH. Confluence was rated as a
percentage for each scaffold and then analysed using JMP. Gelatin scaffolds
observationally demonstrated higher confluence than zein scaffolds, however
the difference was not significant (77.05 ± 12.21% vs. 69.5 ± 13.07%, P =
0.062) (Figure 6). Sorted parameter estimates suggested that gelatin, dry
seeding, and seeding with 0.7M cells were all beneficial for cell adhesion,
however none of these were significant (P>0.05). While cell confluence
appeared to vary between the different conditions, again none of the
differences were found to be significant (Figure 7).

To determine whether the MuSCs adhered to the scaffolds had differentiated and
begun to mature, the cells were immunostained with anti-myosin heavy chain
(MF20) and myogenin (MyoG) antibodies. No positive signal for either protein
were discovered through imaging (Figures 8, 9 & 10). It was noted that both
scaffolds fluoresced brightly under the imaging filters, including cell-free
scaffolds (Figures 11, 12 & 13). We hypothesised that the scaffolds may be
absorbing the secondary antibodies and disrupting signals we may otherwise
have noted from differentiating cells.  

  


Limitations


  1. Both scaffold types were difficult to handle, reducing our ability to reliably flip them when imaging to view the second side. This also resulted in gelatin scaffolds being sucked into pipette tips when immunostaining, which may have led to cell loss. 
    * This could be mitigated by increasing rigidity and thickness of both scaffold types
  2. Hoechst staining seemed to not fluoresce strongly enough to identify cells on Day 7, which led to the loss of a dataset
    * CMFDA or DAPI staining may be a more suitable stain than Hoechst to ensure sufficient fluorescence 
  3. Difficulties with manipulating exposure settings on the Zaber for Day 7 samples also contributed to the loss of a dataset
    * A second "checking step" has been added to the Zaber lab book template to ensure this doesn't happen in the future 


Future Directions


Despite the high scaffold confluence achieved on day 14 in differentiation
media (demonstrated by DAPI staining) neither the zein or gelatin scaffolds
stained positive for MyoG or MF20. Due to the background fluorescence seen
when imaging these samples we suspect the scaffold materials are absorbing the
secondary antibody. As a result of this effect, we are unaware of the
differentiation capacity of our cells on zein and gelatin. Consequently, if we
were to repeat this experiment or pursue similar materials we should instead
assess differentiation using an alternative means such as western blot, total
protein assay or our ELISA pipeline (once this has been established for work
with scaffolds).

The difficulty experienced when handling these scaffolds could likely be
improved by increasing thickness and rigidity. This can be achieved through
continued communication with Gelatex to describe our updated requirements.


Conclusion


Nanofibrous zein and gelatin are promising scaffolds for our MuSCs. They both
support prologned adhesion of cells for 14 days in E6 media. It was unable to
be determined whether the muscle cells differentiated and matured into muscle
fibres, however a high cell confluence was achieved nonetheless.


