

See full report sent to Matrix Meats here:

https://docs.google.com/document/d/1CxizKpk6Rev5JUITomsxbgOBvcSkdeHSYwT7jJhrxLY/edit?usp=sharing


Key Findings


  1. Electrospun zein scaffolds shrunk in size within 24h when exposed to cell culture conditions (growth media, 37'C, 5% CO2)
  2. Electrospun zein/gluten scaffolds were too fragile when handled and displayed auto-fluorescent artifacts upon imaging with DAPI
  3. Wet zein resulted in consistently higher seeding efficiency in comparison to dry zein regardless of seeding density
  4. Zein/gluten scaffolds displayed poor scaffold confluence (>10%) by day 7 in differentiation medium
  5. Zein scaffolds seeded with 0.7M cells/scaffold maintained a scaffold confluence of ~47% by day 7 in differentiation medium, with high variation between replicates                                                           
  6. Scaffold shrinking/scrunching of the zein distorted scaffold morphology and negatively impacted the reliability of imaging
  7. The electrospun zein and zein/gluten scaffolds in their current format are not promising candidates for future investigation
  8. As a result of the zein material shrinking it was recognised that our method of fluorescent imaging for assessing scaffold confluence is susceptible to changes in scaffold morphology over-time. Consequently, we should aim to employ our upcoming ELISA platform in future studies, which is less open to these limitations. 
  9. Based on this experiment, in addition to the sensory tasting of zein and electrospun zein in alginate, we have decided not to pursue zein as a scaffold material any further. 

  


Discussion


Upon handling the electrospun zein and zein/gluten scaffolds it was
immediately identified that zein/gluten scaffolds could not be lifted from the
96-well plate plate without breakage and were incredibly thin. Whereas,
although the zein only scaffolds where thin and difficult to handle these
could be moved to a new plate. As a result the zein/gluten scaffolds remaining
in the same plate/wells throughout the entire duration of the culture (9 days
total) whereas the zein samples were moved on day 1 of proliferation and
subsequently cultured in a separate plate.  

After 1 day in cell culture conditions it was found that the zein only
scaffolds had significantly reduced/shrunk in size (to approximately 1/10th of
the original size/surface area). The shrinking of zein is an observation that
we have not experienced before and thus it is predicted that this could be due
to the carrier material used during electrospinning (4.8% PEO) and/or the low
scaffold thickness <0.2mm of these samples (see Fig.1). As a result of the
scaffold shrinking cells were seen to have visually detached on day 1 (cells
were present in the media and on the base of the well when the samples were
moved to a new plate after 24hrs). Despite this, on the day 1 imaging of the
zein scaffolds demonstrated a seeding efficiency of >75% for all zein scaffold
conditions (seeding efficiency could not be calculated for the zein/gluten
samples as these could not be moved from the plate). For day 1 imaging of the
zein/gluten samples cells were apparent in the wells, however, it was
impossible to distinguish whether the cells had adhered to the scaffold
material or to the tissue culture plastic immediately below the scaffolds. In
addition, fluorescent artifacts were observed within the cell-free zein/gluten
material, with specs of fluorescence (similar in size and shape to cells)
present throughout the scaffolds after DAPI staining (Fig.2). Consequently, an
accurate measurement of scaffold confluence of the zein/gluten samples could
not be distinguished in this investigation.  
  
The scaffolds were stained with DAPI and imaged again following 7 days in
differentiation medium. On the day 7 timepoint cells could still be observed
on the zein only scaffolds, with an average confluence of 31.67 ± 24.66 and
43.33 ±, 27.54 for wet and dry zein scaffolds seeded with 1.3M cells/scaffold
respectively, 46.67± 36.17 and 46.67 ± 18.83 for wet and dry zein scaffolds
seeded with 0.7M cells/scaffold respectively and 7.5 ± 3.54 and 31.67± 25.66
for wet and dry zein scaffolds seeded with 0.5M cells/scaffold respectively.
Wherein, the high variation between replicates (n=3) for these samples was
likely caused by issues with scaffold morphology and subsequent issues with
imaging of the cell-seeded scaffold surface. The degree of shrinking and
'scrunching' of the zein material varued between scaffolds which result in
visually apparent differences in scaffold morphology. In particular, it was
observed that for some scaffolds the non-seeded underside of the scaffolds had
folded inward during scaffold shrinking, and was now partially covering the
cell-seeded side of the scaffold, see Fig.2. As a result, it is difficult to
rely on our image analysis of these scaffolds to provide a true representation
of scaffold confluence. Thus, in future work we should aim to use our upcoming
ELISA platform for the analysis of scaffolds prone to changes in morphology,
as this method which will not be influenced/distorted by the changes in the
scaffolds physical appearance. Despite the questionable accuracy of the
confluency readings from this experiment, the adherence maintenance observed
on the zein scaffolds over a 9 day culture period is a promising outcome.  
  
In relation the zein/gluten samples no cell presence was observed using
fluorescent imaging following 7 days in differentiation medium. The potential
reason for the cell loss in these wells was likely related to the inability to
move the scaffolds during cell culture. Wherein, regardless of using non-
tissue cultured treated plates, we typically observe high cell adhesion to the
base of wells after scaffold seeding. Thus, to prevent the occurence of overly
confluent cells on the base of the wells, which can release potential signals
and by-products that  are detrimental to the cells on the scaffolds, it has
become standard practice to physically move scaffolds to new plates 24 hours
after seeding. However, as the zein/gluten scaffolds could not be moved during
the 9 day culture period it is likely that the cells on the base of the wells
became overly confluent and apoptotic. Subsequently, the apoptitic cells on
the base of the wells will have resulted in the cell death of adherent cells
present on the zein/gluten scaffolds. With the dead cells being washed away
during the daily 100% media changes.  

In summation, the electrospun zein and zein/gluten materials in their current
format cannot be considered desirable scaffold candidates for further
exploration. Wherein the major limitations of these scaffolds include the
significant material shrinkage observed for the zein material and the fragile
and immovable properties of the zein/gluten material.

  

Figure 1

Photograph of zein scaffolds after 24 hours in cell culture conditions (37'C,
5% CO2). Image to show zein scaffold shrinking (material initially covered the
entire base of the well).

Figure 2  
  

Fluorescent image (5x) taken on the main lab zaber of a cell-laden Zein
stained with DAPI on day 7 of cell culture. Image demonstrating zein scaffold
shrinking/scrunching.

Figure 3

Fluorescent image (5x) taken on the main lab zaber (DAPI) of a cell free
control zein/gluten scaffold stained with DAPI. Image demonstrating
fluorescent artifacts.


Future Directions


If we are to further pursue electrospun materials from Matrix Meats we should
request the following scaffold attributes:  
  
1\. Scaffold thickness should be equal to or greater than 0.3mm (based on the
thickness of previously handled PDLG scaffolds on which we achieved
differentiation)  
  
2\. Scaffolds should be able to retain their overall morphology under cell
culture conditions (basic growth media, 37'C, 5% CO2)  
  
3\. Scaffolds should not be anchored to the plates and should be readily
moveable without breakage.

4\. Based on the results of this study and from the recent sensory testing of
electrospun zein sheets, with and without ethanol treatment, we will not be
pursuing this material type further and should therefore discuss alternate
materials with Matrix Meats.  
5. As a result of the zein material shrinking it was recognized in this experiment that our method of fluorescent imaging for assessing scaffold confluence is susceptible to changes in scaffold morphology over-time. Consequently, we will aim to employ our upcoming ELISA platform in future studies, which is less open to these kinds of limitations. 

  
  
  





