

What is the cell availability team doing?

Essentially, the cell availability team is concerned with:

  1. Pushing the limits on how many doublings our clones can expand.
  2. Get closer to achieving an immortal cell line through single cell cloning (SCC) so we one day can have a non-exhaustive supply of cells.
  3. Optimising how they work with microcarriers to fully realise their proliferative potential.

The start of the journey - Single Cell Cloning (SCC) and the Machine Learning
Model

The chronological pipeline for the cell availability team is:

Thaw out a MuSC WCB_1 of a particular MuSC cell line and expand it on
microcarriers and/or planar culture to generate 1 million cells (enough for
SCC at Garvan). We then take our cells to Garvan for single cell sorting. The
operator uses a FACS sorter (flow cytometry) to place a single cell into each
well in a 384 well plate and then we take this back to Vow. Each cell in each
well is now an individual clonal population. Each cell in each well doubles
(at different rates) and produces identical copies of the parent - we call
these populations clones.

So now each well is a homogenous clonal population. We want to know which are
the best clonal populations (i.e. the ones that look and grow the best), so we
image each well using the Zaber over 4 days. At the end of the four days, the
machine learning model developed by Derek sorts through the images for each
well and chooses the best clones. The best clones are the wells in the 384
well plate with the most cells and the best cell morphologies.

We make a shortlist of which wells had the best clones and then passage the
best clones from the 384 well plate into a 96 well plate. We do the same
sorting and imaging process for the best clones in the 96 well plate and
passage into a 24 well plate. We passage into more restrictive vessels as we
become more selective about our clones, until we have one or two really strong
clones, that we're confident will not senesce in our rigorous expansion
process on microcarriers (in which they pass the Hayflick limit).

The expansion process:

Now that we have a good clone or two, we can expand it enough to bank down
into an MCB, which in this case we call an MCB_2 (an MCB banked down after
SCC). Once we have banked down an MCB_2 we can now put our clone through a
rigorous expansion process on microcarriers - in order to bank down a WCB_2.
We might start by thawing out the clone into T-flasks, but at some stage we
will passage into microcarrier culture. Then, we bank down a WCB_2 derived
from planar culture but more importantly microcarrier culture (the idea here
is to have microcarrier adapted clones as early on in the process as
possible).

Achieving 10x doublings:

At this point we have a WCB_2 of our good (and hopefully healthy) clone of
interest. Now, we conduct a second expansion process on microcarriers to
achieve 10 doublings of the clone on microcarriers. We do this by seed train
in increasingly bigger and bigger vessels (keep in mind, the last 2 of these
doublings has to happen on the Biostat A):

E125 a E250 a E500 a E2000 (or Biostat A)

How do we actually monitor the doublings? We analyse the culture at different
time points throughout the seed train and use FIJI + MIA Capture to get an
estimate of the total cells in culture at a particular point. More on this
below.

Vow's microcarrier work:

  1. Basic theory, context and challenges

Microcarriers are essentially tiny beads we have our cells stick onto and
proliferate on to grow mass numbers. Why would we use microcarriers when we
can use 30 x 10CS's? It's more efficient to proliferate cells on microcarriers
as it's shape allows more surface area available for cells to grow on rather
than planar cultureware like 4CFs etc. As microcarriers have a higher
SA/Volume ratio available than planar vessels, the potential to grow mass
numbers of cells is huge. In the past, Tom and Nathan have worked hard to
narrow down the best microcarrier for our cells to seed and grow on to be
Cytodex 1 which are positively charged beads with an affinity to our
negatively charged cells. Cytodex 1 is great for seeding our cells on (we've
shown high seeding efficiencies in the past), the primary problem for some
time has been getting the cells we've worked hard to grow - off the beads
(i.e. harvesting our cells). Recently, we've taken care of the issue of
detachment by using higher shake speeds and Trypsin as our detachment enzyme.
Moreover, Taipan allows us to aspirate the cells once they're detached before
they can settle and seed back onto the carriers. As a result, we've had really
good harvests using Taipan (better than ever before) - hopefully making
microcarriers a viable choice to implement into Production once again.

  1. Seeding

Seeding cells onto microcarriers is as simple as dispensing the cell
suspension into an equilibrated E flask full of microcarriers (see Point 6).
In the past, we've used intermittent shaking to high success as we've had even
and high seeding. Recently, we've had some issues with not being able to do
intermittent shaking for seeding due to other project streams needing the
shakers at the same time. Hence, we've adapted to have continuous shaking
during seeding. This just means keeping our E-flask shaking continuously at a
specific RPM (e.g. 110 RPM).

  1. Basic feeds

Media changes is the same concept as in planar vessels. Take 50% of the media
out, put 50% fresh media in. With E-flasks, the most important thing is to
make sure the carriers settle to the bottom and pellet so you can aspirate the
desired volume of media (the supernatant in this case). This way you don't
suck up any carriers with cells on them and only aspirate the media. I find
that using a 10mL serological for E125s and E250s minimises the chance of this
happening. Keep in mind that your aspiration speed should be on the lowest
setting. Essentially treat your microcarrier layer like a cell pellet and you
can't go wrong.

  1. Sampling, staining, imaging cultures

At some point during proliferation or before a harvest, we essentially want to
know how many cells are on our carriers at a given time point (i.e. how
confluent is our culture?). We can find out by doing a sample and stain of our
culture. The basic concept is: take a certain uL of culture out into a well
plate, add PBS and make sure you have a monolayer of microcarriers at the base
of the well (this can be finnicky - ask me or Nathan on how to do this). We
checked to see if we have a monolayer by examining the well under the Primo -
if you have carriers bunching together and not forming a nice monolayer, mix
gently using a P200. Our stain is Hoescht, so we add 2uL and mix well with the
P200 so it stains evenly - then we incubate for ~ 20 mins in the dark. The
most important thing in this whole process is not to form bubbles when
adding/mixing liquids to our well plate. The presence of bubbles seems to push
all the carriers together and not forming a nice monolayer. Once incubation is
done, we image on the Axio (or Zaber) using PHASE and DAPI channels at the
same positions (important). We want one PHASE and one DAPI image per position
on our well plate (this is important for MIA/FIJI analysis). To get a great
DAPI image we want the cells to be prominent, but not so prominent that they
glow and light up the edges of the carrier they are on. Furthermore, we want
our background to be as dark as possible in order for the FIJI macro to pick
up a contrasted cell. A sample and stain is usually done a day after seeding
to determine how successful the seeding event was, and also before and after
harvesting to gather how successful the harvest was.

  1. MIA analysis (Nathan to cover)

Using the macro Nathan has developed, we can use the images we took in our
sample and stain to get an estimate on how many cells per carrier there
currently is in our culture. Nathan is the best person to explain the
intricacies of this macro, but in a nutshell it uses a circle counter to count
the carriers in our PHASE image. Then it counts the fluorescing cells in our
corresponding DAPI image and overlays this on the outlined carriers which then
ultimately gives us our cells/carrier.

  1. Harvests

The workflow of a harvest is the same as planarware. Get rid of the media,
wash to remove as much serum as possible, add detachment agent, monitor
detachment, and neutralise when ready. After this point, collect suspension
into centrifuge tubes and spin down. We use pluronic to protect the cells at
high shake speeds and to dissipate the charge interaction between cells and
the carriers. Currently this is in the form of Poloxamer 188 which we add to
all aliquots.

The difference when working with E-Flasks:

  * When aspirating any supernatant, wait for the carriers to settle (washes before Trypsin)
  * Instead of Tryple we use Trypsin/EDTA as our detachment reagent
  * Add Poloxamer188 to all aliquots at 1%.
  * We use an equal amount of Growth Media to neutralise Trypsin instead of PBS.
  * We use Taipan to aspirate supernatant after detachment.
  * Suspend your empty carriers in PBS after harvest so you can sample and stain (post-mortem)



  1. Equilibrating carriers

Microcarriers in a sense, need to get adjusted to the environment they're in.
In this case, when setting up cultures we suspend our fresh carriers from PBS
into Growth Media and let it equilibrate for a minimum of 2 hours before
using. We also don't want to over-equilibrate our carriers so they must be
used within a day or two ideally before seeding.

  1. Setting up cultures

How do we go from an empty E-flask to having a culture with cells? First we
add in microcarriers from a stock solution (usually 20g/L) into our E-flask
and wash and suspend in growth media till the working volume. We want our
carriers to be in a specific concentration in our flasks in order to get cells
on all carriers. This concentration is 4.5 mg/mL. So how do we go from a stock
20g/L solution of Cytodex 1 to an E-flask with carriers in growth media at 4.5
mg/mL?



Let's say we wanted to equilibrate an E125 which has a working volume of 30mL

C1*V1 = C2*V2

20mg/mL * V1 = 4.5 mg/mL * 30mL

V1 = (4.5*30)/20

= 6.75mL

So we need 6.75mL of our stock solution.




