Quick summary of main findings


1\. Positive stains were obtained for both Vimentin immunofluorescent
conditions, however only for DOLLY12 sheep fibroblasts and not mouse
fibroblast cells.

2\. No signal could be obtained in any of the TE-7 antibody staining treatment
groups, irrespective of cell type, antibody type and antibody dilution.

3\. Scaffolds had broken apart following cell seeding, suggesting the Zein
scaffolds can only be used within one week for the purpose of seeding cells
onto.


Discussion


A prominent finding of this study was that both sheep and mouse fibroblast
cells were unable to be successfully stained despite using two separate TE-7
antibodies. Moreover, this outcome was irrespective of cell type, either sheep
or mouse, and dilution of TE-7 antibodies used. Additionally, the unexpected
cell loss displayed from the MOCHA fibroblast cells ensured that these cells
could not be utilised as a positive control for the TE-7 antibody staining.
Due to the lack of an immunofluorescent antibody marker specific to fibroblast
cells, the TE‑7 antibody is often utilised in the identification of
mesodermally derived connective tissue such as fibroblast cells. However, both
TE-7 antibodies employed in this study have a tested species reactivity for
human and mouse fibroblasts. Therefore, it is plausible that sheep fibroblasts
do not have sufficient physical and chemical similarities in the target
antigen and thus unable to be stained using this particular antibody. It may
also be probable that this isolated fibroblast cell line (DOLLY12) is not
mesodermally derived. As previously mentioned, the TE‑7 antibody reacts with
cells of mesodermal origin and the inability to obtain a positive signal
suggests that the TE-7 antigen may not be expressed by these cells.



In conjunction with TE-7 antibody staining, sheep and mouse fibroblast were
probed using a Vimentin-FITC conjugated antibody to detect the intermediate
filaments expressed by mesenchymal cells. Sheep fibroblast cells stained with
Vimentin antibody or in combination with the AF488 secondary both displayed
the expression of the Vimentin protein. Unfortunately, as previously mentioned
the lack of MOCHA cells meant we could not verify this finding against a
commercial known fibroblast cell line. Despite staining the fibroblast cells
with the Vimentin antibody, the staining appeared diffuse and non-specific and
did not stain majority of the cell body, but rather only the periphery.
However, the adherent cultures were imaged roughly ten days after antibody
staining, therefore the apparent lack of a strong signal may be attributed to
antibody degradation which occurs naturally over time. Fortunately, the
fluorescent Vimentin signal obtained from the sheep fibroblasts precludes the
possibility that this cell line is not mesodermally derived, as Vimentin is
expressed by mesenchymal cells. Lastly, despite attempting to seed cells onto
Zein scaffolds these scaffolds were quite fragile and broke apart after cell
seeding. Zein scaffolds are typically used within a one-week timeframe,
however the scaffolds used in this study were stored in dPBS for approximately
one month. Consequently, the scaffolds likely lost their structural integrity
and could be broken apart relatively easily.  


Limitations


A profound limitation of this study was the inability to obtain an
immunofluorescent signal indicating the expression of the TE-7 antigen, and
therefore confirm the cells were indeed fibroblasts. This was irrespective of
what cell line, type of TE-7 antibody and dilution of antibody used. Moreover
despite staining the Vimentin proteins in our sheep fibroblast cell line
(DOLLY12), the lack of an abundantly strong signal indicates that the Vimentin
experimental procedure likely needs to be modified.


Future work


1\. Research into the literature for other potential fibroblast cell markers
beyond TE-7 and Vimentin and assess their ability to stain our in house
fibroblast cell lines.

2\. Continue optimising the Vimentin antibody staining protocol and evaluate
any modifications made against our in house fibroblast cell line (DOLLY12) in
addition to a known commercial fibroblast cell line.


Conclusion


The purpose of this study was to optimise a protocol to successfully stain
fibroblast cells using either a TE-7 or Vimentin antibody. Despite the
limitation of not being able to stain our DOLLY12 fibroblast cells using the
TE-7 antibody, the Vimentin stain appears promising in the sense that we may
potentially be able to stain exclusively for fibroblasts using this antibody
in any future co-culture experiments.


