

Stability testing of freeze-dried materials - Pectin, Agarose, Carrageenan
Locust Bean Gum (CLBC)  

  

\- Samples were cut from the three freeze dried materials using a sterile
scalpel in the BSC.

\- 2 ml of DMEM was added to three wells in a 24 well plate.

\- Each material sample was placed in the media in one of the three wells.

Observations:  
The Pectin appeared to dissolve into the media immediately.

The Agarose visibly swelled but held a shape.

The CLBC held it's shape well.

  

\- The samples were placed in the incubator at 14:50 and checked again at
15:30.

Observations:

No sample was visible in the pectin well.

The agarose was visbily swollen with media and was delicate. It broke apart
when attempting to grab it with the tweezers but it could still be picked up
with the tweezers.

The CLBC looked slightly swollen with media but held its shape well when
picked up with tweezers.

  

\- The samples were checked again at 17:00.

Observations:

No sample was visible in the pectin well.

The agarose was visbily swollen with media and was more delicate. It broke
apart again when attempting to grab it with the tweezers but it could still be
picked up with the tweezers.

The CLBC looked more swollen with media and looked more delicate but stil held
its shape well when picked up with tweezers.

  

\- The samples were checked again at 11:45 am 13-04-21

Observations:

No sample was visible in the pectin well.

The Agarose was see-through, looked like a raft of bubbles. Somewhat able to
be picked up, jelly-like, mostly dissolves on handling

CLBC: Looks similar to agaose but far smaller sample left. Cannot pick up,
dissolves on handling.




Samples were checked again on 14-04-2021

Observations:

No samples maintained structural integrity after being left in cell culture
conditions (37'C, 5%, in growth medium) overnight.

For this reason samples were not. taken forward for cell seeding.  
  
Future work:  
Future attempts should aim to employ material cross-linking prior to freeze-
drying to see if cross-linking can improve structural stability of the
samples.


