

Key Findings:

  1. Fibroblasts were not successfully adapted to suspension culture in the trialled media and conditions
  2. The planar-expanded control culture (D/F+10%FBS+1xP/S) was the only condition which supported extended cell survival in suspension culture (>36 days)
  3. 100% feeds help to reduce debris in suspension cultures, thereby improving the accuracy of cell counts 




Discussion

In this experiment, two different methods of seeding cells into suspension
were trialled. In the first attempt, one million F_NANDO3 (chicken)
fibroblasts were thawed directly into suspension culture (E-125) in
DMEM+10%FBS. The method used for this thaw was one first trialled at Vow in
2019 (REC-RND-01 Suspension Experiment 2). As expected during suspension
adaptation, cell numbers fell from 1,000,000 to 94,000 between day 1 and day 8
(Figure 1, "NANDO direct thaw"). This was followed by a brief period of
proliferation, before cell numbers began declining again from day 14 onwards
(Figure 1, "NANDO direct thaw"). This thaw method was repeated later in the
experiment in an attempt to replicate and possibly extend the initial cell
growth, however no proliferation was seen in these cultures (Figure 1, "DOLLY
direct thaw" and "NANDO direct thaw 2.0").

The second method trialled involved expanding cells first in planar culture
before seeding them into suspension. After 12 days of proliferation in planar
culture, F_NANDO3 were seeded into suspension culture in 2 x 50 mL shake
tubes. The first shake tube culture was treated with
DMEM/F12+5%FBS+1xP/S+1:100 ACA, as this was the best performing condition from
Trial 4 (Suspension trial 4 report). Unfortunately, this culture was discarded
shortly after seeding as it appeared that the pellet was aspirated during an
early feed, before any counts were taken. The control culture maintained a low
number of viable cells until Day 49 (Figure 1. "NANDO planar expanded"), when
it was discarded after determining that no live cells remained.

Figure 1. Proportion of cells remaining alive out of total cells seeded from
Day 0 to Day 49

Given the lack of replicates, we cannot take any statistically significantly
data from this trial. However, we were able to improve our suspension
adaptation pipeline through a few key learnings. Firstly, high levels of
debris in the cell suspension after 50% medium changes made it difficult to
achieve accurate cell counts. In response, we switched to 100% medium changes
from day 4 onwards, resulting in clearer cell suspensions and more accurate
cell counts. Excessive cell debris is also a key reason for cells forming
clumps in suspension; the sticky nature of DNA released through cell lysis
causes cells and other debris to aggregate into large clumps (Sigma, ND).
There is no evidence that performing 100% feeds in serum-containing cultures
is harmful to the cells, so based on our observed improvements I propose we
continue with 100% feeds for future suspension trials.

Secondly, these cultures were key in improving our cell counting method. The
cells appeared to undergo morphological changes when moved from adherent to
suspension culture, which made distinguishing between live and dead cells
impossible based on trypan blue staining. This observation was an important
step to the optimisation of our current counting procedure, using Hoechst and
Sytox Green to generate a live/dead cell count.

Finally, we observed a significant amount of cell clumping in all cultures. As
stated before, cell debris plays a key role in cells forming aggregates.
However, this is also likely due to the presence of calcium and magnesium
ions, which both promote cell adhesion, in our DMEM/F12 basal medium (Cui et
al. 2016). Moving away from a medium with calcium or magnesium ions will be
beneficial for future suspension adaptation work.




Limitations

  1. This experiment was ongoing while we were determining how best to count our suspension cells. We had a lot of unsuccessful attempts at creating a counting method throughout this process. Therefore, we are missing a number of data points for this experiment, where the chosen counting approach did not produce reliable/readable data. 
  2. We did not have replicates for many of the cultures, so statistically significant data could not be attained




Conclusion

Fibroblasts were not successfully adapted to suspension by means of either
direct thaw into suspension or seeding from planar culture.




Future directions

  1. For future trials, focus on Ca2+ and Mg2+-free basal media to reduce cell aggregation  
  2. Perform 100% feeds instead of 50% feeds to reduce levels of cell debris, thereby enabling more accurate counts and further reducing the incidence of cell clumping 
  3. Add replicates for conditions to gain statistically significant data  




References

Sigma Aldrich, ND. Cell Clumping Troubleshooting.
https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/AU/en/technical-documents/technical-article/cell-
culture-and-cell-culture-analysis/mammalian-cell-culture/cell-clumping-
troubleshooting

Cui, L., Kinnunen, T., Boltze, J., Nystedt, J. & Jolkkonen, J. 2016. Clumping
and Viability of Bone Marrow Derived Mesenchymal Stromal Cells under Different
Preparation Procedures: A Flow Cytometry-Based In Vitro Study.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4789023/


