Brief Background


The aim of this experiment was to generate at least one clonal DOLLY12
fibroblast cell line growth in adherent culture by sorting single isolated
cells into 4x 384 well plates. Generating clonal cells lines (derived from 1
isolated cell) allows for those that have spontaneously developed mutations
resulting in longevity or immortality to out-compete other clonal populations
and in turn, indicates to us which populations may achieve more doublings and
hence be useful for producing meat for billions of people.

A mixed population of Sheep fibroblasts were FACS sorted into 4 x 384-well
plates (1 cell per well), and surviving/proliferating colonies were expanded
further into vessels with a larger surface area to accomodate proliferation.

Unfortunately in this experiment, no clonal populations were able to surpass
T25 flask stage and were all subsequently discarded and the experiment was
stopped. There are, however, some learnings we can take from this experiment
to assist with subsequent attempts.


Metrics


Number of 384-well plates sorted into:  4 x 384-well plates

Cell line:  F_DOLLY12 WCB (2282-Culture-6303-Vial-3of115)

Sorted with: `Hoechst⁺ and PI⁻`

Imaged/screened with: `2 x Zaber imaging platforms inside black server boxes
with temperature regulation to ~32ºC`

Growth Media: `DMEM/F12 + 20% FBS + 1X P/S`


Key Results


https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1rv-
Awy3Yt1EZS2qsDzK9m9UyIpCkZV4GkcqcJkz7dho/edit#gid=0

  

From the 4 x 384-well plates, 101 populations were selected and expanded into
96-well plate on Day 8-post sort.

6 days after seeding into 96-well plate, 10 colonies were expanded into
24-well plate format.

6 days after seeding into 24-well plate, 4 colonies were expanded into 6-well
plate format.

These 4 colonies demonstrated very slow growth, but were passaged into T25
flasks 8 days after being seeded in the 6-well plates to see if a passage
would encourage proliferation.

These 4 final clones were:

F_DOLLY12_1I4  
  
F_DOLLY12_1J19  
  
F_DOLLY12_1L20  
  
F_DOLLY12_2N19  
  
However, upon inspection 6 days after seeing into the T25 flasks, very few
cells were seen and it was decided to discard the flasks.

  


Discussion


This round of single cell cloning was Vow's first ever attempt at cloning
fibroblast cells. All previous attempts were performed using MuSCs (muscle
stem cells), and the systems set up were optimised for MuSC identification
(Derek's Machine Learning model to identify cells). Based on results from
Single cell cloning BUFFY6 MuSCs, it was determined that 384-well plates could
be used in future cloning experiments as opposed to the 96-well plate format
previously used.

At Day 8 of 384-well plate culture, wells identified with >15 cells per well
were selected to proceed to 96-well plate (resulting in 101 populations). This
picklist was generated using the ML model developed to identify MuSCs. Based
on the results, the ML model performed exceptionally well identifying
fibroblasts, indicating that the morphologies may be close enough to each
other to allow the same model to be used on both cell types.

Based on literature, fibroblasts seeding densities usually lie between 5,000 -
10,000 cells / cm2. This may be the reason that our cells did not perform
well, as the densities that the cells were seeded at was significantly lower
than this (15 cells in a 96-well 0.32cm2, whereas even the lower end of
recommended seeding densities would suggest 1600 cells should be seeded in
this surface area).


Limitations


We need a better understanding of the minimum seeding density when working
with fibroblasts to encourage population proliferation.

We also need a better understanding of whether conditioned media (supernatant
from a confluent flask of the same cells) would assist in the early stages of
clonal growth when 1 cell is alone in a well. Conditioned media should contain
growth factors that encourage proliferation, but we need to address this in a
controlled experiment.


Conclusion


This cloning experiment with Sheep fibroblasts was unsuccessful in generating
high performance clonal cell lines, however it did indicate that our process
needs to be optimised for fibroblast cell growth, and that the ML model
designed to identify MuSCs works equally as well for fibroblast cells from
Zaber-generated images.


Future Directions


  1. Attempt the same cloning run with conditioned media.
  2. Allow cells to grow to a higher confluence before expanding.
  3. Confirm the ML model's performance with a larger dataset of fibroblast images.


