

This report will focus on the experiment involving only creatine as a media
component. Another study within this experiment, involving creatinine and
creatine will not be analysed and discussed in details (see below as to why it
is excluded)

Older experiment (creatinine + creatine) vs newer experiment (creatine only)

  1. Both older experiments (with creatinine) and newer experiment (creatine only), had different seeding situations, whereby the former switched to E6 after 2 days in culture, whilst the latter switched to E6 the day after. Furthermore, both were seeded at different levels, based on cell availability. Both of these will have an impact on the results, and therefore should not be compared as they were treated differently.   
  2. Furthermore, for the first round of the creatine experiment, creatinine was accidently used instead of creatine. Upon discovering this on day 3 of culture in E6, the media was change back to creatine. 
  3. For the first round of this experiment, media was prepared by weighing small amounts of creatine at each concentration. As the amounts was small, this resulted in less accuracy and higher chance of human error. Therefore, for the next experiment round, media was prepared by creating a 10 mM stock solution of creatine, and combining this with different volumes of E6 media to obtain the ideal concentrations. 
  4. The cells in the old experiment using creatinine appeared to have formed clusters by day 10 in E6. This is not a normal behaviours of MuSC, indicating that the cells have died. Refer to link for images  https://au-mynotebook.labarchives.com/share/Vow%2520-%2520Team%2520Science/MTg1Ny43fDEwNjMxNy8xNDI5L1RyZWVOb2RlLzM2NTAwMjUzMDB8NDcxNS43

  

  

  

Results

Based on the MyoD, MF20 and DAPI images taken after 10 days in E6 media, it
would appear that the creatine media did have an effect on maturation of the
cells. However, due to issues with imaging, where there was a bright band
visible in both MyoD (A488) and MF20 (A555) channels, there was difficulties
viewing the degree of staining. For all conditions, the monochrom images
showed that there was some MyoD and MF20 positive staining. The length, amount
and intensity varied across the images. Below are the images merged and in
monochrome. (Due to issues with formatting when adding image captions, the
images will not include captions. The images are arranged in order of merged
image, MF20, MyoD, DAPI.) Refer to labbook for more images with the band
cropped out https://au-
mynotebook.labarchives.com/share/Vow%2520-%2520Team%2520Science/MTQzOS4xMDAwMDAwMDAwMDAxfDEwNjMxNy8xMTA3L1RyZWVOb2RlLzE1NzUzNTM5ODF8MzY1My4x.

  

Treatment with only E6  (0mM creatine)

  

 Treatment with 1 mM creatine

  

Treatment with 3 mM of creatine

  

Treatment with  5 mM of creatine

Treatment with 7mM of creatine

Treatment with 9mM of creatine

  

Discussion

As evident in the images above, addition of creatine in the media did not lead
to any detrimental effects to maturation and rather has shown an overall
positive effect on myotube formation. As seen in the images of cells in E6,
myotubes appears short and scattered. However for cell treated with creatine
concentrations of 1, 5, 7, 9 mM, more myotubes were formed with most being
longer in length. It is good to note that at 3mM of creatine, we did not see
much myotube, with those that did show a signal, showing shorter lengths,
similar to those in E6. This may be causes by those particular wells having
less cells compared to the others, which may have occurred from uneven pipette
mixing during seeding. As seen in the DAPI images, there appears to be less
cells overall. However, this is difficult to determine as there was no
analysis made that measures protein concentration or cells present in the
wells. This could be an area to include in future studies. Asides from the
treatment at 3mM, it would appear that as the creatine concentration
increased, myotube formation improved, in particular at 9mM, we see longer
myotubes with stronger signals.


