

Procedure

Monitoring Cultures

Cell Count:

  1. Clean a haemocytometer and coverslip using 70% ethanol and lint-free wipes and leave them to air dry.
  2. Once cleaned, place a slight amount of 70% EtOH on the contact strips either side of the etched counting area, then place the coverslip into position and slide it into place using light pressure on the contact strips on either side of the counting chamber. The coverslip should become stuck in place on the slide. 
  3. Place the haemocytometer, with coverslip, onto the front grill of the BSC to evaporate any remaining ethanol mist inside the counting chamber. 
  4. Transfer the shake flask(s) that require a cell count into a BSC aseptically.
  5. Gently swirl the flask(s) in a clockwise direction in a motion similar to a shaking incubator/platform to ensure the cells are homogeneously distributed in the growth medium prior to retrieving a sample.
    1. Larger flasks such as an E2000 or E5000 shake flasks will require additional force to swirl the growth medium due to the larger volumes.
  6. Using the appropriate consumables (see appendix 9.1) retrieve a sample from the shake flask(s). Ensure the time between this step and the previous step is as short as possible to prevent the cells from settling to the base of the flask.
  7. Transfer the cell sample(s) into a 1.5 mL eppendorf centrifuge tube for cell counting out of the BSC.
  8. Mix the cell suspension sample very thoroughly with 10-20 triturations, while also moving the pipette tip around the edge of the vial to ensure even more mixing of the sample.
  9. Extract the appropriate volume of cell suspension and dilute with Trypan blue to form the desired dilution.
  10. Mix the stained sample very thoroughly with 10-20 triturations, while also moving the pipette tip around the edge of the vial to ensure even more mixing of the sample.
  11. Transfer 10 uL to the haemocytometer
  12. Place the haemocytometer under the microscope with a 10x objective and locate the correct focal plane so that the etched lines and cells are clearly visible.
  13. Perform a quick assessment of the entire etched chamber area to ensure that the cell numbers in each counting segment appear approximately equal (at a quick glance). 
  14. count all cells inside each of the five squares of the counting chamber (marked in blue below).
  15. Record the counts for each segment for both live and dead cells in the MFG "New cell count calculator" spreadsheet --> https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1sDqHQ7x2J-_lqIVKhfBqnXJRjsNZAR724wiLtSYLI8g/edit#gid=235487472.
    1. Also enter this data into the widget below

Detection of microbial contamination:

See below for useful indication of microbial contamination:

  * Culture is extremely cloudy-turbid with swirls visible when shaking the flask or a thin film is present oo the surface.
  * Under a low-power microscope, the bacteria appear as tiny, moving granules between the cells, and observation under a high-power microscope can resolve the shapes of individual bacteria.
  * Clumps or budding small objects observed for fungal contamination, whereas moving small objects with a different shape from your cell lines might indicate bacterial contamination.
  * Culture has a very pronounced foul smell.

Microscope Identification Procedure:

  1. Clean glass slides with 70% EtOH and wipe with lint free paper.
  2. Using the required consumable, extract the necessary volume of cell suspension for the shake flask(s) requiring validation of microbial contamination.
  3. Triturate the samples 5 times, and extract 15uL of media dispense onto the glass slide with a cover slip placed on top.
    1. Note: Each glass slide provides enough space for 2 tests.
  4. Repeat step 2 for remaining samples.
  5. Observe for signs of microbial contamination at 20 x magnification.
  6. Capture photos of slides with any signs of contamination and record culture ID(s).

  




Cells still look healthy,  at a viability of 96%. A bit of clumping seen under
microscope but not too bad. Bigger clumping observed in the E-flask.


