

## Completed by: Bec Screnci




The Single cell cloning pipeline at Vow has progressively been optimised for
generating MuSC (muscle stem cell) clonal cell lines.

In Q3 of 2021, Vow is focusing on developing fibroblasts to be grown up for
product V1. Therefore, generating high performance fibroblast clonal cell
lines is critical for achieving this to ensure repeatability in production
batches, and to select for cells that surpass the hayflick limit
substantially.




Therefore, the Single cell cloning pipeline must be adapted to support
proliferation and survival of primary fibroblast cells. In this experiment, we
attempt to determine whether adding 50% conditioned media (supernatant from a
flask containing proliferating cells, suspected to contain helpful growth
factors that will encourage single cells to proliferate after FACS). We also
attempt to determine whether cells can avoid Hoechst staining when FACS
sorting and whether this facilitates cell survival.

  

This experiment also will provide valuable data on cell confluence between
days 7-10 in 384-well plate, which will provide an indication of when the more
effective time to detach cells would be. This is an important metric, as
fibroblast cells need to be grown at a high confluence, whereas MuSCs when
grown at high confluence differentiate and fuse into myotubes, losing their
stem-like-state. We do not yet have valuable data on confluence after FACS
sorting of fibroblasts that give us an indication of when the right time to
pick forward colonies would be.




We will achieve these aims by setting up 3 plates with conditioned media
(supplemented with additional FGF), and 3 plates with fresh media only.

Hoechst stained cells will be sorted into half of each plate.

Non-Hoechst stained cells will be sorted into the remaining half of each
plate.

Plates will be monitored and scanned on the Zaber automated microscope imaging
station at days 1, 2, 3, 7 and 10 post-seeding.

  

Any successful colonies (those that continue to proliferate and generate
confluent wells) well be expanded up to MCB_2.


