Background:


The purpose of this experiment was to determine whether co-culturing sheep
primary MuSC with fibroblast cells could improve adherence and differentiation
of seeded MuSC on Zein scaffolds. In order to accomplish this we seeded four
separate conditions evaluating if the addition of fibroblasts and Vitamin C
could improve MuSC adherence, maintain adherence and ultimately enable the
MuSC to undergo myogenic differentiation. Here we report the key findings.

Reminder of experimental setup:

  

Column 1: Fixed and Stained (DAPI) Day 1 Post Fibroblast Seeding

Column 2: Fixed and Stained (DAPI, TE-7, MyoD) Day 1 Post MuSC Seeding

Column 3: Fixed and Stained (DAPI, MyoD), Day 1 change to E6 Media but in
serum containing media

Column 4: Fixed and Stained (DAPI and MyoD) Day 1 change to E6 Media

Column 5: Fixed and Stained (DAPI and MyoD) Day 6 change to E6 Media

Column 6: Fixed and Stained (DAPI and TE-7) Day 6 change to E6 Media


Results:


DAPI staining of Day 1 Zein scaffolds seeded with fibroblasts indicated the
presence of DNA material in both fibroblast seeded conditions indicating
successful seeding of cells (Figure 1). Both scaffolds displayed a confluence
of roughly 50% and as expected no positive stain was detected in the cell free
scaffold conditions. Cell counting highlighted that seeded scaffolds had a
seeding efficiency of approximately 96% for both the fibroblast only and
fibroblast with Vitamin C supplementation conditions, indicating that majority
of the cells seeded adhered to the Zein scaffolds.

  

  

  

Following MuSC seeding, Zein scaffolds were tri-stained with DAPI, to detect
cell nuclei, as well as TE‑7 antibody and anti-MyoD antibody, to differentiate
between the fibroblast and MuSC, respectively. Immunofluorescence staining
highlighted that the expression of neither TE-7 nor Myo‑D was able to be
detected, despite obtaining an indication of cell nuclei with the DAPI stain
(Figure 2). Moreover, this finding was observed in the remainder of conditions
regardless of whether scaffolds were seeded with either fibroblasts or MuSC or
whether Vitamin C was included as a media supplementation (Images not shown).
Despite this, the DAPI stain indicated that the Zein scaffolds had a higher
level of cell confluency compared to the post day 1 fibroblast seeding. Taken
together, these results suggest that we are unable to obtain an
immunofluorescence signal from both cell types at the same time and thus
incapable of distinguishing whether the cells are fibroblasts or MuSC.  

  

  

To eliminate the possibility of primary antibody interactions during the
staining procedure, following the change to E6 media, Zein scaffolds were only
stained with DAPI and Myo-D antibody. In addition, to compare the effects of
E6 on fibroblast and MuSC adherence, a control group of Zein scaffolds
cultured in serum containing media were simultaneously stained using the same
antibodies. Cells cultured in either E6 or serum containing media did not
display any expression of MyoD, despite a positive signal from DAPI indicating
cell nuclei. Similar results were obtained for fibroblast and MuSC cultured
for 6 days in E6 media in terms of detecting a positive signal for either MyoD
or TE-7 (Images not shown). Furthermore, it appeared there was no significant
differences in cell confluency between scaffolds cultured in serum containing
media or E6. Interestingly immunofluorescent images captured from Zein
scaffolds cultured with only MuSC appeared to be relatively confluent
indicating high MuSC numbers.  

  


