

Process

  1. Spray down 100mm plate containing zein samples in DMEM with 70% ethanol and move to BSC 
  2. Using sterile tweezers, move 2 pieces of zein into 2 wells of a 96-well-plate. Re-parafilm 100mm plate and replace in fridge.  
  3. Using a micropipette, aspirate the supernatant from the zein scaffolds in the 96-well-plate. Leave plate lid off.11:26 am
  4. Record immediate observations (do they curl up or change shape in any way, do they become stuck to the bottom of the well, do they become difficult to handle/fragile, do they crack?), and then again at 2hrs, 4hrs, 5 hrs. Take images. 
  5. After the 5 hour time-point, spray down 100mm plate containing zein samples in DMEM with 70% ethanol and move back into BSC 
  6. Using sterile tweezers, move 2 further pieces of zein into 2 new wells of the 96-well-plate. 
  7. Using a micropipette, aspirate the supernatant from the zein scaffolds. Leave plate lid off.   : a/pm
  8. Observe next morning. Record observations and take images on phone/tablet. 




Observations at time-point 1: 0H (baseline)  

Timestamp:  11:26 am

Do the zein pieces curl up? No. Scaffold pieces are fairly flat to the bottom
of the well. Scaffold in well A1 is slightly curled against the side of the
well but this is due to positioning not drying.  

Do they become stuck to the bottom of the well? No. After aspirating the
liquid it is still easy to move the pieces off the base of the well.  

Are they difficult to handle/fragile, do they crack? No. Samples are easy to
manipulate and are still pliable. Not at all brittle.  

Any other observations? Pieces are pale yellow with slight pink colouring from
media. They still feel elastic and similar in feel to Plasticine. Piece in
Well A1 is wrinklier than piece in well A2.  

Images

Scaffolds from above

Scaffolds from below  






Observations at time-point 2: 2H

Timestamp:   13:37  

Do the zein pieces curl up? Have they changed shape in any way?  No they are
still flat on the bottom of the well.  

Have they become stuck to the bottom of the well? No, they are still easy to
pick up off the bottom of the well with tweezers. They were put back onto the
bottom of the well after inspecting.  

Are they difficult to handle/fragile, do they crack? No they are easy to
handle with tweezers and do not crack. They do not feel brittle. Some moisture
is still present on the samples.  

Any other observations? The yellow colour is present in the middle of the
samples, with the red tinge mainly around the edges of the samples. One of the
sides for one sample is more red tinged than the other side.  

Images

Image taken through the screen of the BSC with an ipad camera.

  




Observations at time-point 3: 4H

Timestamp:  15:45 pm

Do the zein pieces curl up? Have they changed shape in any way?  Zein now
appears peach pink around the edges and pastel yellow in the middle. Discs
beginning to contract.  

Have they become stuck to the bottom of the well? No  

Are they difficult to handle/fragile, do they crack? they are not fragile,
have a 'chewy' appearance  

Any other observations?

Images

  




Observations at time-point 4: 5H

Timestamp:  4:45pm

Do the zein pieces curl up? Have they changed shape in any way?  The peices
now have a much darker colour around the edges, extending towards the middle
when compared to an hour earlier. Discs have become more contracted.  

Have they become stuck to the bottom of the well? On of the pieces was
difficult to remove from the bottom of the well.  

Are they difficult to handle/fragile, do they crack?  They are easy to handle
and are not cracking or fragile.  

Any other observations?

Images

  




Observations at time-point 5: Morning after o/n drying

Timestamp:  9:30  am

Do the zein pieces curl up? Have they changed shape in any way?  The ones left
to dry last night (ie approx 16 hr drying) are dry this morning and in good
shape. They have not curled up much at all.  

Have they become stuck to the bottom of the well? One did become stuck to the
bottom of the well and broke apart when trying to remove from the bottom with
tweezers. The other one did not stick to the bottom but was still difficult to
get out of the well, since it matched the size of the well and would not
change shape like the soft undried samples usually would.  

Are they difficult to handle/fragile, do they crack? The one which stuck to
the bottom cracked apart. The one which didn't could be retrieved without
cracking but would still likely crack if handled roughly.  

Any other observations? Media was added to the samples. 50 ul seemed to cover
the sample but barely. At least 100 um seemed more appropriate to cover the
sample.

The other samples left to dry the morning before (24 Hr drying) were very dry
and a bit curled. They looked and felt like little crisps.  

Images

16 hours drying + media

24 hours drying

  


