

While it is hard to be prescriptive with what a report should contain, there
are a few common points that all reports should consider. A report should
(almost) replicate the "Discussion" section of a journal article. The
following is a ROUGH guide with a suggested paragraph structure. PLEASE ensure
to include references to previously published work (or links to work conducted
here at Vow).

  1. What is the most important overarching finding? 
  2. A brief discussion of all results and how they fit into our final goal of producing an edible meat product (this section might be several paragraphs long and should put the results into the context of what has been done before). 
  3. Any limitations of the study, why might our results not be correct? 
  4. What is the overall conclusion? 
  5. Discussion of future directions.

***PLEASE NOTE, YOUR REPORT SHOULD BE FINALISED WITHIN TWO WEEKS OF COMPLETING
ALL EXPERIMENTAL WORK.***  

  


Brief background


To reach the scale of cultured meat production required to feed billions of
people, we will require a cell expansion strategy that can take smaller, fast
growing cell population and expand them it to larger and larger vessels. Doing
this should help us reach our goal of generating enough biomass to support
product development, ultimately providing delicious food to billions.

Our current gold standard method used in production for scaling up of adherent
cultures relies on planar culture expansion techniques. Cells are expanded
from cryovials (at 1x105K cells/vial) using planar, multi layer cell factories
to generate total cell numbers around 4.0x108 cells over ~8 doublings over two
weeks (see production tracker here, batches 001-008). Scaling of the current
adherent process is heavily dependent on factors including incubator space,
high media requirements and manual handling of cultures.

Moving to suspension cultures practices can alleviate some of the challenges
associated with scaling planar culture. the higher surface area to volume
ratios supported by microcarriers allow for more efficient cell growth per
unit volume of media. However, suspension culture scale up is heavily
dependent on having a fast growing muscle stem cell line that is capable of
proliferating on the microcarrier in a suspension environment. This cell line
must also be able to maintain its proliferative capacity after detachment and
sub passaging protocols that facilitating culture expansion in suspension.
Previously we attempted to isolate and expand a fast growing clonal muscle
muscle stem cell line from sheep, DOLLY12_11E7. We were then able to expand
this cell line using both, planar and microcarrier culture, into our first
working cell banks derived from a single cell here .

In this experiment we aimed to expand cells from both planar derived and
microcarrier derived working cell banks. Our aims were to continue expansion
in suspension until cell populations had reached a total of 10 population
doublings.


Data analysis


Raw data in GSheet

https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1oLMCdTAloOLIW66vX4Ad71BNfpp4Et75qvwBegww6AU/edit?usp=sharing


Key results


Vials of clonal WCB2 cells were thawed into planar culture and, at the first
passage, seeded into microcarrier culture. The microcarrier culture was
serially passaged in an attempt to increase the total cell number (Figure
1(a)). However, due to poor harvest efficiencies of approximately 50%, the
cell counts exhibited a "sawtooth" trend and did not increase appreciably
after the first microcarrier passage (Figure 1(a)). It was still possible to
calculate the number of doublings between each passage, and over the course of
the experiment these totaled approximately 5, which is half of the 10
doublings that was aimed for. It appears that the cells from the microcarrier
adapted WCB2 vials, despite growing more slowly after thaw, maintained a
higher growth rate after passaging into microcarrier culture (Figure 1(a)).
Cell recovery following harvest was also improved towards the end of the
experiment using a custom designed filter dubbed the 'Taipan' filter by day 20
(figure 2). The differentiation and fusion capacity of DOLLY12_11E7 WCB_2
vials was also inconclusive due to low confluence observed at all timepoints
during a 14 day differentiation assay conducted on the cells post thaw.

  

Figure 1: Time series of total cell counts (a) and doublings (b) over the
course of the experiment.  



Figure 2: Harvest of DOLLY12_11E7 cells using different cell recovery
strategies. Cells from one flask were collected using a sedimentation and
supernatant aspiration collection method (no Taipan filter). Cells from
another flask were collected collecting supernatant through a custom filter
(Taipan filter) while culture was being mixed manually.



  



  

  

  


Discussion


Throughout the experiment we identified two limiting factors that will impede
Vows ability to grow cells at scale in suspension culture.

The first problem centres around a suboptimal harvesting strategy that sees
under 50% cell recovery from our microcarrier cultures. During expansion of
DOLL12_11E7 we consistently obtained cell counts that were significantly lower
than total cell population estimated in cultures prior to harvesting (figure
1). Hoechst 33342 staining of harvested cultures revealed instances were
microcarriers still contained intact cells that were either still adhere to
the carrier surface, or loosly attached. This result suggested that i) our
detachment protocols need optimization to ensure 100% cell detachment and ii)
free floating, detached cells may be getting trapped between microcarriers
during the sedimentation step prior to supernatant collection.

The second problem to address centres on the slow doubling rates witnessed in
microcarrier suspension during cell expansion. Over the course of 30 days in
culture, DOLLY12_11E7 cells were only able to obtain 5 doublings in total.
This is a 3.4 fold decrease in doubling rate compared to heterogeneous DOLLY12
cell grown in planar culture for production currently (see production tracker,
batches 007 and 008) and a 5.28 fold decrease in doubling rate when compared
with the average doubling rate seen in the DOLLY12_11E7 cells at their time of
banking to MCB_2. The decreased doubling rate may stem from ongong adaptation
of the clonal line to suspension culture. However, it may also be likely that
the clonal cell line has not been immortalized though the single cell cloning
pipeline. The DOLLY12-11E7 line maybe approaching replicative senescence,
having endured a collective 23 passages since biopsy isolation, 9 prior to
single cell sorting and 14 after. We will have to validate whether
DOLLY12_11E7 cells are approaching senescence, possibly by thawing a vial in
planar culture and expanding it to passage 23 while monitoring cell
morphology.

To address the issue of poor cell recovery we decided to construct a
filtration that could be inserted into the shaker flasks to separate
supernatant from microcarriers. We hypothesized that such a device would
increase cell recovery in two ways. First, allowing mixing during aspiration
would prevent detached cells from binding to positively charged microcarriers
via electrostatic interaction. Secondly, mixing during aspiration would
prevent free floating cells from becoming trapped between microcarriers,
making more cells accessible during aspiration. A filtration device was
constructed by cutting a ~1x1cm square hole in the side of some silicone
tubing and covering it with a metal mesh containing pores approximately 70um
in diameter. The mesh was secured to the tubing using zip ties and the tubing
was sealed on one side using some connective lures. An open lure component was
added to the other side of the tubing that would allow docking of a syringe
tube. The device was nicknamed the 'Taipan' (because it looked like a snake)
and was autoclaved at 121 degrees for 20 minutes prior to use.

We were able to use the the Taipan filter twice during this experiment in E
flask cultures. During its first use in collecting harvested cells from an
E500 shake flask we observed ~100% cell recovery when compared to our E250
control that had undergone the usual sedimentation and collection protocol
(figure 2). The filter was then used to harvest a separate E500 flask four
days later. However, cell number per carrier prior to harvest of this culture
was low (~1-4 cells per carrier) despite 4 days of proliferation. Hoechst
33342 staining of harvested microcarriers did show 100% detachment and cell
recovery, with no cells left on microcarriers or in the surrounding dPBS
supernatant (see data here).

A differentiation assay was also performed using cells thawed from our
microcarrier derived WCB_2 and planar derived WCB_2 banks. No MyoG+ or MF20+
stains were present on any of the immunostained cells that had been 4% PFA
fixed after 8, 12 and 14 days of differentiation regardless of differentiation
media (see reference images in the linked lab book entry). DAPI staining of
cells showed that confluence in each well was low (~30-40%), with large gaps
seen between clusters of nuclei in the well base. It is unclear if the cell
confluence diminished after the switch to differentiation media, or whether
cells became dislodged during manual handling during differentiation feeds or
immunostaining. If the former then this may explain why the DOLLY12_11E7 cells
were unable differentiate or fuse given their low confluence.

  


Limitations


Differentiation and fusion assessments of DOLLY12_11E7 WCB_2 vials were
inconclusive due to low confluence observed at all time points.


Conclusion


The DOLLY12_11E7 line was found to only support 5 doublings over 30 days, a
3.4 fold decrease in doubling rate compared to heterogenous DOLLY12 cells
grown in planar culture currently for production.  
We were unable to confirm whether the myogenic capacity of DOLLY12_11E7 cells
thawed from WCB_2 banks had been retained.


Future Direction(s)


  * Validating cell longevity in our DOLLY12_WCB_2 vials will be important before using them for further bioprocessing scaleup. Tracking doubling rates of DOLLY12_11E7 WCB vials in planar culture up to and past P14 may reveal whether the proliferative capacity of the clone is declining independant of suspension culture stresses. 
  * Retesting myogenic capacity of clones from our DOLLY12_11E7 WCB_2 bank will be required before these cells are used in further studies. 
  * Further optimization of our Taipan filter is required to ensure it can be used under proper aseptic technique.


References
