  
  
Overarching findings  
 Cell survival and proliferation was poor across all groups except for the
serum control in which cell numbers were maintained with frequent passages.

Results

This study was terminated early due to a lack of cell survival and
proliferation in serum free medias.

Details of cell counts at each time point/ passage can be found in the results
section here : https://au-
mynotebook.labarchives.com/share/Vow%2520-%2520Team%2520Science/MjQ5Ni4wfDEwNjMxNy8xOTIwLTEzNDg3L1RyZWVOb2RlLzM4ODQ2ODY5Nnw2MzM2LjA=

Limitations  
 It is difficult to make any broad conclusions from this study given that
recombinant albumin was accidentally omitted from all ACF medias.

Discussion  
 This study illustrated that albumin is a crucial to fibroblast cell survival
and proliferation in serum free media. Although the exact mechanisms are not
well understood, albumin been shown be beneficial in serum free culture [1,
2]. Albumin is believed to improve cell cultures by modulating oxidative
stress which can occur as a result of high oxygen tension or due to reactive
oxygen species produced during normal cell metabolism [3]. By binding to
lipids, amino acids and metals, albumin is thought to aid the entry of these
media components into cells [3].

At Vow, we have recently been using a recombinant human albumin from Richcore.
In the context of cultured meat, the use of recombinant human products may be
undesirable for consumers, who may be uncomfortable eating protein derived
from a human genetic sequence. Sourcing recombinant versions of animal albumin
may be a more palatable alternative in future.  
  
Conclusions  
 Due to the accidental omission of albumin in our serum free medias in this
study, we saw cell death and a lack of cellular proliferation across all serum
free medias.  
  
 In future we plan to replicate this study so that we can fully assess the
proliferative capacity of fibroblasts in these ACF medias. Albumin will be
used in all our ACF medias moving forward.

From a consumer perspective, sourcing recombinant albumin derived from an
animal genetic sequence may be more desirable that human recombinant albumin
as a food additive.







1.         Yamane, I., et al., " Serum-free" Culture of Various Mammalian Cells and the Role of Bovine Albumin. 1976\. 1(3): p. 279-284.

2.         Alfano, R.W., Albumin in cell culture media-An examination of quality and function. 2017.

3.         Francis, G.L.J.C., Albumin and mammalian cell culture: implications for biotechnology applications. 2010\. 62(1): p. 1-16.




