Background


The primary objective for PPP involves developing and optimising a process in
which fibroblast cells are able proliferate in suspension culture to
ultimately hand off that process to production for scale up. A critical aspect
of this involves generating a suspension-adapted fibroblast cell line that can
survive whilst in suspension and continue to proliferate over an extended
period. Early fibroblast suspension experimental work has highlighted the
importance of testing various components to determine a combination that
offers the highest success of maintaining fibroblast viability and promotes
cellular proliferation. Several media supplementations such as rock
inhibitors, anti-clumping agents and RDG peptides have previously been
assessed within the suspension pipeline. However it remains unclear, whether
any of these additions significantly promote the growth and survivability of
fibroblasts in suspension. Therefore the focus of this experiment will involve
evaluating two classes of compounds to achieve fibroblast cell proliferation
in suspension; histone deacetylases and hydrolysates.

  

Histone Deacetylases modulate p53 activity

Histone deacetylases (HDAC) are a class of enzymes that remove acetyl groups
from amino acids on histones, resulting in a more closed chromatin structure
and repression of gene expression [1]. Subsequently, DNA expression and gene
transcription can be regulated by this process of acetylation and
deacetylation, due to interplay between histones and DNA. Despite forming a
large protein superfamily we aim to test the impact of two histone
deacetylases (HDAC1, HDAC2), due to their nuclear subcellular localisation and
ubiquitous tissue distribution [2]. These regulatory proteins modulate p53
transcriptional activities via regulation of p53-DNA binding activity and are
over expressed in many cancer types; with the rationale that over-expression
of these proteins will encourage development of an immortalised cell line
[3][4]. In addition, under expression of these deacetylases is linked to
cellular senescence and cell cycle arrest [5]. HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) have
been used clinically to inhibit the proliferation of cancerous cells in vivo
by inducing cell cycle arrest, impede differentiation and apoptosis [6]. In
our current suspension experiments, we are observing high rates of cell death;
therefore including exogenous HDAC1 & HDAC2 in our suspension media can
potentially promote cell survival and cell proliferation.

Rational for the concentration of HDACs

1\. Assume the amount of HDACs we received is the amount needed for 500mL  
2\. Look into the amount of HDACs over-expressed tumours and aim for that
concentration.

3\. Trial at least 2 x different concentrations for each HDAC  
4\. Ideally include 1-2 conditions where we include both types of HDACs  
5\. Tom and I may make this design into a mini-DoE.

  

Background on Hydrolysates

Protein hydrolysates (also known as "peptones", "peptides" or "hydrolyzed
proteins"), are protein fragments created by the hydrolysis of some high-
protein material [7]. Typically, plant or microbial biomass is digested by
exogenous enzymes, acids or bases. Autolysis (digestion by the cell itself)
can also be induced by activating endogenous enzymes (as is the case with
yeast cell products like Marmite and Vegemite). Besides amino acids and
peptides, these hydrolysates contain an array of other compounds that are
released during the digestion of the biomass. The combination of digestible
amino acids, peptides and a cocktail of growth-promoting molecules makes these
hydrolysates attractive alternatives to serum as media supplements. However,
the identities and/or mechanisms of action of most of the compounds in
hydrolysates remain largely unknown, so hydrolysates are often known as
chemically "undefined" or "complex" supplements.

A successful serum-free culture medium for CHO cells, known as "WCM5", was
developed by the Wellcome Research laboratories in the early 1990s [8]. The
ingredients of this medium are shown below. The final formula contained soy
peptone as the major supplement; however, yeast extract was found to boost
cell proliferation even more than soy peptone. The authors cite "quality
assurance and purification considerations" as the reason for why soy peptone
is preferred over yeast extract. Some other chemically defined supplements
were important to enable proliferation with this medium, including: ions like
zinc, copper, sulfate and phosphate; vitamins like pyridoxine (B6) and
cyanocobalamin (B12); small molecules like ethanolamine and putrescine; and
proteins like insulin. These supplements are commonly used even in modern
chemically-defined ACF for CHO cells [9].

The WCM5 formulation of Keen and Rapson (1995) would be a good starting point
for a serum-free suspension medium. There are a number of potential additional
supplements that could be tested, such as those commonly found in human
mesenchymal stem cell (HuMSC) media below [10].

  

Rational for the concentration of hydrolysates:

Of the several available animal free peptones we currently have in-house the
BBL Phytone Peptone and Difco Select Phytone UF appear to be the most
promising due to their status as serum replacements, use in mammalian culture
systems such as CHO cells and their low endotoxin content. Both of these soy
peptones can be added as media supplements in varying concentration's with 2.5
- 7 g/L recommended as the optimal concentration by BD (supplier) [11].
Therefore we aim to assess whether the addition of these hydrolysates (at 5
g/L) can promote fibroblast proliferation is suspension and can offer a
suitable replacement to animal serum.

References:

1\. Xu, W.S., Parmigiani, R.B. and Marks, P.A., 2007. Histone deacetylase
inhibitors: molecular mechanisms of action. Oncogene, 26(37), pp.5541-5552.

2\. Kelly, R.D.W., Chandru, A., Watson, P.J., Song, Y., Blades, M., Robertson,
N.S., Jamieson, A.G., Schwabe, J.W.R. and Cowley, S.M., 2018. Histone
deacetylase (HDAC) 1 and 2 complexes regulate both histone acetylation and
crotonylation in vivo. Scientific Reports, 8(1), pp.1-10.

3\. Harms, K.L. and Chen, X., 2007. Histone deacetylase 2 modulates p53
transcriptional activities through regulation of p53-DNA binding activity.
Cancer research, 67(7), pp.3145-3152.

4\. Wagner, T., Brand, P., Heinzel, T. and Kramer, O.H., 2014. Histone
deacetylase 2 controls p53 and is a critical factor in tumorigenesis.
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Reviews on Cancer, 1846(2), pp.524-538.

5. Mrakovcic, M., Kleinheinz, J. and Frohlich, L.F., 2019. p53 at the crossroads between different types of HDAC inhibitor-mediated cancer cell death. International journal of molecular sciences, 20(10), p.2415.

6.  Kim, H.J. and Bae, S.C., 2011. Histone deacetylase inhibitors: molecular mechanisms of action and clinical trials as anti-cancer drugs. American journal of translational research, 3(2), p.166. 

7\. Lobo-Alfonso, J., Price, P., and Jayme, D. (pp. 55 - 78, 2010). Use of
protein hydrolysates in industrial starter culture fermentations. In Ummadi,
M., Curic-Bawden, M. (Eds). Protein Hydrolysates in Biotechnology.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4020-6674-0_6

8\. Keen and Rapson (1995). Development of a serum-free culture medium for the
large scale production of recombinant protein from a Chinese hamster ovary
cell line. 153-163.

9\. Zhang, H., Wang, H., Liu, M., Zhang, T., Zhang, J., Wang, X., & Xiang, W.
(2013). Rational development of a serum-free medium and fed-batch process for
a GS-CHO cell line expressing recombinant antibody. Cytotechnology, 65(3),
363-378\. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10616-012-9488-4

10\. Jung, S., Panchalingam, K. M., Rosenberg, L., & Behie, L. A. (2012). Ex
vivo expansion of human mesenchymal stem cells in defined serum-free media.
Stem Cells International, 2012. https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/123030

11. https://legacy.bd.com/ds/technicalCenter/misc/lcn01558-bionutrients-manual.pdf


