

While it is hard to be prescriptive with what a report should contain, there
are a few common points that all reports should consider. A report should
(almost) replicate the "Discussion" section of a journal article. The
following is a ROUGH guide with a suggested paragraph structure. PLEASE ensure
to include references to previously published work (or links to work conducted
here at Vow).

  1. What is the most important overarching finding? 
  2. A brief discussion of all results and how they fit into our final goal of producing an edible meat product (this section might be several paragraphs long and should put the results into the context of what has been done before). 
  3. Any limitations of the study, why might our results not be correct? 
  4. What is the overall conclusion? 
  5. Discussion of future directions.

***PLEASE NOTE, YOUR REPORT SHOULD BE FINALISED WITHIN TWO WEEKS OF COMPLETING
ALL EXPERIMENTAL WORK.***  

  




Method summary

50 L of phenol red free (PRF) DMEM/F12 was made in-house. From this, 100 mL
was put aside at the beginning of the filtration process and another 100 mL
was put aside near the end of the filtration process.

F_DOLLY12 was thawed into 3xT25 flasks in either:

  * commercial DMEM/F12 + 10% FBS
  * in-house DMEM/F12  \+ 10% FBS (from early filtration)
  * in-house DMEM/F12 + 10% FBS (from later filtration)

A 50% feed was performed the following day. On day 6 after thawing, all flasks
were passaged and used to seed 3x 96 well plates for a proliferation assay. 3x
T25 flasks were also seeded using the passaged cells with the intention of
culturing cells in their respective media conditions over a longer time
period.

On day 1 after seeding proliferation assay, 1x 96 wp was Hoechst stained and
imaged. 1x 96 wp was fixed and DAPI stained on day 3 and day 6.

Results & Discussion

After 2 passages and a total of 14 days in culture, cells in all T25 flasks
appeared to be dead as they did not show attachment to flasks (see images
below). Flasks were therefore discarded. Even the positive control (containing
commercial DMEM/F12) showed cell death. The cause of death is unclear but
could be:

  * a bad batch of FBS
    * However, other members of team science would have also reported cell death if this was the case.
  * contamination
    * No contamination was visible in the images. However, regular mycoplasma testing should be used to eliminate this cause
  * the incubators used
    * Other scientists using the same incubator at this time did not report unusual cell death
  * the culture vessels used
    * We do not record which brand of culture vessel is used for each passage
  * passaging technique or time cells were left outside of incubator
    * This has not been an issue in the past
  * PBS or Tryple used when passaging
    * Should be compared with other experiments that were being performed at the same time to determine whether others who used the same reagents experienced the same issue

We have observed unexpected cell death in ACF media experiments previously
this quarter. Therefore, this spreadsheet was prepared to compare the reagents
used and check whether there was a common factor which may explain cell death.
However, there were so many variables involved and no clear cause was
identified from this investigation.

  

  

Data from day 1 of proliferation assay could not be used. Unfortunately, the
lab book did not have enough detail to recall what happened. It's possible the
Hoechst staining was too faint, or an error occurred when imaging so the
images did not go to MIA-Capture. From day 3 data, it appears that cell counts
from late filtration media were significantly lower than early filtration
media. On day 6, there was a significant difference between commercial media
and late filtration in-house media.

  



  

Limitations

The impact of using commercial DMEM/F12 versus in-house DMEM/F12 on DOLLY12
fibroblasts over several passages could not be assessed because cells in all
T25 flasks died after 2 passages.

There was no day 1 data available for the proliferation assay which makes it
difficult to confirm whether cells were seeded evenly for all conditions. Cell
counts were only available for 2 data points so a growth curve cannot be
produced.

Cell death investigation is very time consuming and difficult to perform as
information about reagents and equipment used is dispersed across many lab
book entries and experiments. Additionally, due to the large number of
variables involved, it can be difficult to determine the cause even when the
data is collated into a spreadsheet.

Conclusion

Given the cell death seen across all conditions, including controls, our
results are inconclusive.  Initial proliferation assay findings suggest that
using this batch of in-house DMEM/F12 from late filtration may result in
significantly lower cell numbers than using commercial DMEM/F12.  However,
this finding needs to be confirmed by performing a proliferation assay with
more time points, especially day 1 data.  Potential issues with the in-house
media may stem from the large aluminum pot used to make the media.  Green and
grey coloration was seen in the media, especially in the last bits of media
being filtered from the bottom of the pot.  While additional investigation
into this discoloration was not performed, it is possible this had something
to do with the poor results seen in our late filtration media condition.

Next Steps

Repeat proliferation assay with more time points.

The impact of in-house DMEM/F12 on cell growth over a longer period needs to
be assessed again after the cause of cell death in T25 flasks is determined.

Create LabArchives lab books/widgets that will assist in easier record
keeping. This will ensure that all growth conditions will be recorded in a
standardised format, making it easier to compare cells, media reagents, and
incubators used across multiple experiments.  


