Background:


  

Figure 1. Schematic diagram of experimental plan.

  

Figure 1 highlights the different conditions employed during the fibroblast
ECM optimisation experiment . All samples were separated into two groups based
on what type of media the cells received (changed every 3 days regardless of
media type).  
  
In brief, the conditions in group one received the standard growth media
(DMEM/F12 + 20% FBS + 1X P/S) from the day of seeding, however in the 48 hrs
prior to harvest this condition group was treated with growth media containing
50 ug/mL L-ascorbic acid and 5 ng/mL TGF-B. Conditions in group two on the
other hand received the standard growth media supplemented with 50 ug/mL
L-ascorbic acid and 5 ng/mL TGF-B from the day of seeding. Each condition had
a 100% media change every three days.  
  
In addition to the two media conditions the effects of gelatin coating,
collagen coating and seeding in a collagen gel:growth media mix was
simultaneously evaluated.  




The purpose of this experiment was to assess if it was possible to obtain
viable ECM scaffold sheets, derived from fibroblast cells grown in different
culture conditions, as shown in Figure 1. As a primary focus of the DoE
project is to continuously scout and evaluate new scaffolds in its pipeline it
was first necessary to determine whether we could achieve fibroblast scaffolds
of sufficient thickness and structural integrity to serve as scaffolds that
could then have MuSC seeded onto them. To achieve this, we seeded 8 different
conditions (n=2 for each condition) onto petri dishes and cultured them
continuously for a period of ~2 weeks and subsequently decellularised them
using a freeze thaw procedure previously described in the literature [1]. Any
viable candidates were then taken forward as scaffolds and seeded with MuSC.
Additionally, in order to evaluate the impact of treatment conditions and
whether certain culture combinations (previously described in the table above)
contributed to an increase in fibroblast ECM production all conditions were
weighed pre-seeding (petri dish only) and re-weighed prior to the freeze thaw
cycle which served as endpoint indication Here we highlight the key findings.  


Results


Subsequent to the freeze thaw and overnight drying, only samples which were
seeded in the Pure EZ collagen gel solutions were suitable for taking forward
as scaffold material. Unfortunately, due to the overnight drying the remainder
of the conditions had substantially reduced in size (an approximate surface
area of 0.5 cm x 0.5 cm) and hardened to the base of the culture vessel.
Consequently, this resulted in majority of the samples being too small for
subsequent use as scaffolds and so these were discarded. However, in the case
of the collagen seeded conditions, although the fibroblast-gel matrix had
hardened and adhered to growth surface the samples had not reduced
significantly in size. Thus, following rehydration (immersion in DMEM media)
the collagen gel samples could be lifted from the culture surface and cut into
8-10 pieces approximately 4 mm by 4 mm (Figure 2, Figure 3). However, despite
detaching the collagen gel samples, due to the gelatinous nature of the
material it was not possible to obtain homogenously sized pieces. Accordingly,
the gel like nature of the material resulted in scaffolds being cut into
samples of varying size and shape, as exemplified by Figure 4.

  

  

Figure 2: Representative image of Pure EZ collagen gel seeded with fibroblast
cells following rehydration in DMEM. Collagen gel cell sheet samples exhibited
a gelatinous like appearance subsequent to overnight drying and re-hydration
in DMEM growth media.  

  

Figure 3: Representative image of samples following the freeze thaw cycle and
overnight dry in the BSC. Images are representative of all conditions tested,
with the exception of the Pure EZ collagen suspension samples, and all
exhibited significant shrinking after overnight drying. (a) Cells seeded onto
gelatin coated dish whilst supplemented with continuous Vitamin C and TGF-B
treatment. (b) Non-coated condition in continuous treatment. (c) Collagen
coated sample with continuous treatment.

  

An additional finding arising from this optimisation study was that all
conditions, excluding the collagen seeded fibroblast gel suspension, had
prematurely detached from the growth surface, following exposure to Vitamin C
and TGF-B. Moreover, similar results were observed irrespective of the media
condition or coating solution employed. After approximately one week all
conditions treated continuously with Vitamin C and TGF-B had completely
detached from the growth surface and either formed an aggregated cell clump or
rolled into a thin filamentous rod. Conditions lacking Vitamin C and TGF-B
supplementation the growth media had remained adhered to the growth surface
during continuous culture. However, following exposure to Vitamin C and TGF-B
in the 48 hours prior to harvest these conditions had similarly lifted from
the culture dish and formed aggregates. Interestingly the application of
gelatin coating appeared to delay the effects of cellular detachment in
response to Vitamin C and TGF when compared to the non-coated and collagen
coated dishes. Additionally, fibroblast cells seeded in the collagen gel
matrix appeared to have slowed growth whilst encapsulated within the gel
material. Whilst it was initially observed that the gel encapsulation
supported cell survival these cells required more time to reach a confluence
equivalent to cells seeded in adherent culture. Lastly, upon weighing all the
samples, it was found that the sheets treated with Vitamin C and TGF-B at 48
hours prior to harvest resulted in a slightly larger mass than the continually
treated conditions (see Table 1).

  

  

Figure 4. Cut up scaffold pieces placed into wells of 48-well plate awaiting
seeding of MuSC. 1.8 and 2.8 refers to the fibroblast cells that were seeded
in the Pure EZ collagen gel suspension and treated continuously with Vitamin C
and TGF-B.

  

 Table 1. Mass of fibroblast ECM conditions post experiment

Condition

Weight (g) Duplicate 1

Weight (g) Duplicate 2

Average (g)  
  
Gelatin coated (48hr treatment)

0.59

0.30

0.44  
  
Non gelatin coated (48hr treatment)

0.69

0.29

0.49  
  
Collagen coated (48hr treatment)

0.71

0.26

0.61  
  
Collagen seeded (48hr treatment)

2.97

2.75

2.86  
  
Gelatin coated (continuous treatment)

0.33

0.30

0.32  
  
Non gelatin coated (continuous treatment)

0.25

0.26

0.26  
  
Collagen coated (continuous treatment)

0.31

0.26

0.29  
  
Collagen seeded (continuous treatment)

0.55

0.94

0.74  
  
References:

[1] Xing, Q., Yates, K., Tahtinen, M., Shearier, E., Qian, Z. and Zhao, F.,
2015. Decellularization of fibroblast cell sheets for natural extracellular
matrix scaffold preparation. Tissue Engineering Part C: Methods, 21(1),
pp.77-87.


