Background


The intended outcome of this study was to investigate the combination of
different media supplementations, growth surface coatings and seeding
environments necessary for the optimal generation of fibroblast ECM scaffold
sheets. The justification behind using these sheets as scaffolds is because
fibroblasts synthesise and secrete several components of the ECM, including
structural proteins such as collagen, adhesive proteins, and space filling
glycosaminoglycans, which can potentially enhance the adherence of MuSC [1].
Ultimately the purpose of developing different scaffold materials, including
these fibroblast ECM sheets, is to evaluate whether sheep MuSC can adhere,
maintain adherence, and eventually undergo myogenic differentiation on these
ECM scaffolds. However, it was first necessary to trial a multitude of culture
conditions to gauge which combination offered the most viable ECM scaffolds.

  


Quick summary of main findings


1\. Fibroblast cells seeded in a collagen gel matrix resulted in the thickest
and most viable sheets relative to the other tested conditions based on visual
inspection and physical preparation.

2\. Overnight drying of the sheets, with the exception of those seeded in
collagen gel suspension, resulted in significant material shrinking and
subsequently rendered the samples unsuitable for further use as scaffolds.

3\. Overnight drying of cell sheets from fibroblasts seeded in collagen gels
resulted in the gel matrix strongly adhering and hardening to the culture
vessel growth surface. As a result, the collagen gel sheets required a brief
re-hydration in DMEM growth media prior to lifting, handling and processing
into multiple scaffold pieces.

4\. All sheets, except for the collagen suspension gels, prematurely peeled
off from the petri dish culture surface (effect was delayed in gelatin coated
dishes), after exposure to Vitamin C and TGF-B irrespective of whether samples
received continuous treatment or 48 hour exposure.

5\.  Fibroblast cells seeded in the collagen gel matrix appeared to reach a
higher confluence in the continuous Vitamin C and TGF-B treatment group when
compared to the 48 hour treatment group. However this conclusion can only be
based on the imaging of the petri dish during the culture period.  


Discussion


A prominent finding of this study was that fibroblast cells seeded in a
collagen gel matrix resulted in the most viable sheets, capable of maintaining
their thickness and integrity following the overnight dry. Obtaining this
outcome was irrespective of whether the fibroblast cells were continuously
cultured with Vitamin C and TGF-B supplementation or for a final 48 hours pre
harvest. Fortunately, given that the fibroblast cells seeded in the collagen
gel could maintain their thickness and did not exhibit significant following
the overnight dry ensured these samples could be utilised as scaffolds.
Consequently, of the 8 conditions tested, the sheets produced by fibroblasts
seeded in collagen gel suspension were taken forward as potential scaffolds,
for seeding with MuSCs (see continuation of experiment).

It can be theorized that the improved stability which was seen in the collagen
seeded samples was likely attributed to the gel matrix used for encapsulation.
Wherein, the additional presence of collagen, a structural protein, appeared
to reinforce the integrity of the cell sheets. It could also be assumed, that
seeing as fibroblasts naturally secrete collagen proteins, that a prolonged
culture of the fibroblasts would result in a similar effect to collagen
encapsulation. However, before the the culture time can be extended the
complications observed with premature cell detachment would first need to be
overcome, to ensure the cells can continue to deposit more ECM proteins,
including collagen. Moreover, based on the thickness and poor processability
of the cell sheets conditions which were not seeded in collagen suspension, it
can be assumed that a longer culture duration beyond 2 weeks would be required
to improve cell sheet integrity.

Following the freeze-thaw processed all the cell-sheet samples were left to
dry overnight at room temperature, in an attempt to make the samples easier to
handle and process into scaffolds. However, after overnight drying in the BSS
the majority of the samples (excluding those seeded in the collagen gel) had
significantly shrunk in size. Multiple replicates of each condition would have
been required for the subsequent seeding experiment (seeded with MuSCs in the
DoE pipeline), and thus, due to the shrinking of the sheets there was not
sufficient material left for the sheets to be used as scaffolds. As previously
mentioned, the addition of collagen in the cell suspension condition was
likely the reason for the improved stability seen for these cell sheets, thus
preventing their shrinkage during the overnight dry. Limiting the drying time
to a few hours in the future would potentially prevent excessive drying of
scaffolds and maintain their size and suitability for handling.

A major limitation identified during the process of generating fibroblast ECM
sheets was that all samples, excluding the collagen suspension gels
prematurely detached from the growth surface and formed dense tightly packed
cellular aggregates during cell culture. In this study, fibroblast cells were
supplemented with Vitamin C and TGF-B, with the premise that the exposure to
these components would accelerate the process of generating cell sheets.
However, based on our observations, it appears that the use of Vitamin C and
TGF-B in this way, may have resulted in premature cell detachment. It was
observed that conditions treated continuously with the two media additions
begun to detach from the culture surface within one week, and progressively
continued to detach throughout the culture period. By day 10 of culture the
majority of cells, across all the samples had completely detached from the
petri dish base. Taken together, the premature cell sheet detachment observed
was likely caused by exposure to Vitamin C and TGF-B. Wherein, Vitamin C has
been attributed to enhance collagen production and extensive ECM deposition in
fibroblasts [1], whereas TGF-B has been shown to amplify fibroblast
proliferation [2]. Thus, the combination of the Vitamin C and TGF-B exposure
likely resulted in the accumulation of single dense fibroblast/ECM mass which
could no longer remain adhered to the petri dish base. Furthermore, a similar
finding was also observed in the conditions treated with Vitamin C and TGF-B
over a 48-hour period. Hence, the observation of cell detachment in both media
conditions, indicates that that the Vitamin C and TGF-B treatment cause a loss
of adherence regardless of the exposure time utilised. Subsequently, the loss
of fibroblast adherence was detrimental to the generation of cell sheets,
wherein fibroblasts are known to proliferate more readily in adherent culture.  

Upon researching relevant literature, various timelines were found to have
been employed for the culture of fibroblast cells sheets, with studies ranging
from 2 weeks [3] to 6 weeks [4]. In an attempt to minimise our experiment
length a cell culture duration of 2 weeks was employed in this study. However,
based on the thickness of the sheets attained during this investigation it
could be inferred that a longer culture duration may be required to improve
sheet thickness and subsequent handling. Future iterations of this experiment
should therefore aim to evaluate the effects of extended culture periods on
sheet formation. In addition, future experiments should aim to implore the use
of alternative culture methods to improve sheet thickness without detachment,
such as the use of mechanical restraints and fixing/re-seeding protocols
mentioned previously [3]. Furthermore, an interesting observation discovered
in this investigation was that the fibroblasts which were seeded onto gelatin
coated petri dishes displayed delayed cell detachment in the continuous
Vitamin C and TGF-B treatment group, relative to the other conditions
including uncoated and collagen coated dishes. Consequently, it is plausible
that the gelatin layer provided an adherent substrate that reduced detachment
of the fibroblast/ECM mass. This approach of using surface coatings for
generating cell sheet scaffolds is one which has been widely employed in
regenerative medicine and cell sheet engineering [5]. In particular the use of
the polymer poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (pNIPAM) is typically used as a
thermoresponsive polymer to support the formation and harvest of fibroblast
sheets [5]. Subsequently, the use of adhesive polymers or coating represents a
promising avenue for further exploration in the continuation of this work.

  

  

References:  

[1] Boyera, N., Galey, I. and Bernard, B.A., 1998. Effect of vitamin C and its
derivatives on collagen synthesis and cross‐linking by normal human
fibroblasts. International journal of cosmetic science, 20(3), pp.151-158.

[2]  Liu, Y., Li, Y., Li, N., Teng, W., Wang, M., Zhang, Y. and Xiao, Z.,
2016. TGF-β1 promotes scar fibroblasts proliferation and transdifferentiation
via up-regulating MicroRNA-21. Scientific reports, 6(1), pp.1-9.

[3] Jakab, K., Marga, F., Kaesser, R., Chuang, T.H., Varadaraju, H.,
Cassingham, D., Lee, S., Forgacs, A. and Forgacs, G., 2019. Non-medical
applications of tissue engineering: biofabrication of a leather-like material.
Materials Today Sustainability, 5, p.100018.

[4]  Xing, Q., Yates, K., Tahtinen, M., Shearier, E., Qian, Z. and Zhao, F.,
2015. Decellularization of fibroblast cell sheets for natural extracellular
matrix scaffold preparation. Tissue Engineering Part C: Methods, 21(1),
pp.77-87.

[5]  Kawecki, M., Kraut, M., Klama-Baryła, A., Łabuś, W., Kitala, D., Nowak,
M., Glik, J., Sieroń, A.L., Utrata-Wesołek, A., Trzebicka, B. and Dworak, A.,
2016. Transfer of fibroblast sheets cultured on thermoresponsive dishes with
membranes. Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Medicine, 27(6),
pp.1-12.


Limitations


A major limitation experienced in the current study was the inability to form
viable fibroblast ECM sheets to serve as scaffolds for majority of the
conditions tested. This was in part due to the use of Vitamin C and TGF-B to
accelerate this process, which resulted in premature cell detachment, as well
as not culturing the fibroblast cells for the appropriate amount of time due
to work constraints. Furthermore the overnight drying process appears to be
excessive in the sense that it resulted in mass shrinking and hardening, such
that the samples could not be lifted from the plate without rehydrating them
in DMEM media. Finally despite being able to obtain fibroblast sheets from the
collagen gel suspension condition, these sheets were not homogenous and
resulted in scaffolds of varying size, shape, thickness. In future work, we
should investigate a way to control scaffold size, to ensure each replicate we
seed with MuSC has relatively the same surface area and volume.


Future work


There are various potential avenues to extent the novel findings of this work:

1\. Test the formation of fibroblast cell sheets during a six week culture
period in the absence of Vitamin C and TGF-B media supplementation to prevent
premature cell detachment.

2\. Evaluate the impact of different coating solutions or substrates such as
higher concentration gelatin coating, plastic substrates, mechanical
restraints or thermo-responsive polymers on fibroblast sheet formation and/or
prevention of cell detachment.


Conclusion


The present work represents the first study at Vow investigating the procedure
by which fibroblast ECM scaffold sheets can be generated and successively
decellularised. Despite limitations we were able to successfully harvest two
fibroblast ECM/collagen sheets for employment as a scaffold material (link to
next experiment here). In conclusion fibroblast ECM sheets prepared by
collagen gel suspension presented the most promising scaffolds candidate,
relative to the other condition tested in this study, based on thickness and
processability into scaffolds. Future work in this area should focus on
improving the stability of the cell sheets through the optimisation of the
culture and harvest techniques utilised.


