

While it is hard to be prescriptive with what a report should contain, there
are a few common points that all reports should consider. A report should
(almost) replicate the "Discussion" section of a journal article. The
following is a ROUGH guide with a suggested paragraph structure. PLEASE ensure
to include references to previously published work (or links to work conducted
here at Vow).

  1. What is the most important overarching finding? 
  2. A brief discussion of all results and how they fit into our final goal of producing an edible meat product (this section might be several paragraphs long and should put the results into the context of what has been done before). 
  3. Any limitations of the study, why might our results not be correct? 
  4. What is the overall conclusion? 
  5. Discussion of future directions.

***PLEASE NOTE, YOUR REPORT SHOULD BE FINALISED WITHIN TWO WEEKS OF COMPLETING
ALL EXPERIMENTAL WORK.***  

  




Note: The TGFb used in this experiment was not reconstituted according to the
manufacturer's instructions which may have impacted results.

Key findings

DOLLY12 WCB MuSC were thawed into gelatin coated T25 flasks. 24 hours later, a
100% feed was performed to the following conditions:

  1. serum containing media (DMEM/F12 + 20% FBS + 1x P/S + 10uM p38i)
  2. E810C containing FGF from PeproTech
  3. E810C containing FGF from Reprokine
  4. E810C without FGF (negative control)

When these flasks were observed ~48 hours after the feed, cells in all ACF
media appeared dead. This was unexpected as we have previously proliferated
cells up to 10 doublings in E810C (containing FGF from PeproTech). This
indicated that there could be something in our ACF media which is toxic for
cells and requires further investigation. We were therefore unable to evaluate
the effect of FGF from the two brands for long term cell culture.

Discussion

We have recently observed issues when using ACF media. In EPIC19442, although
we didn't see immediate cell death, our ACF media control performed much
poorer than expected. After the first passage, E810C yielded around ~30k and
48k cells whereas the serum control yielded ~74k cells. After the second
passage, we did not see any attachment in E810C. Similarly, in EPIC16782,
after a couple of passages in E810C and observing decreasing cell numbers, it
became evident that this media was not supporting cell growth.

After comparing which reagents had been used to make E810C across different
experiments, no obvious culprits were identified (see Notion page and
spreadsheet). We suspected FGF to be the issue as we have been using FGF from
PeproTech for all past experiments. FGF from Reprokine just started being used
in May 2021. However, this experiment indicates that there are other
components in the media which could be causing cell death.

Limitations and Future Directions

In the future, when unexpected cell death occurs, we should check for
contamination on 20x objective to eliminate this as a potential cause.
Secondly, we are putting together LabArchives lab books/widgets that will
assist in easier record keeping. This will ensure that all growth conditions
will be recorded in a standardised format, making it easier to compare cells,
media reagents, gelatin, and incubators used across multiple experiments.

Once we have discovered and resolved the cause of cell death in ACF media,
this experiment will need to be repeated. We should continue investigating
growth factors from different companies to identify those that are most
effective, offered at competitive prices, and available at a large scale when
needed.


