

While it is hard to be prescriptive with what a report should contain, there
are a few common points that all reports should consider. A report should
(almost) replicate the "Discussion" section of a journal article. The
following is a ROUGH guide with a suggested paragraph structure. PLEASE ensure
to include references to previously published work (or links to work conducted
here at Vow).

  1. What is the most important overarching finding? 
  2. A brief discussion of all results and how they fit into our final goal of producing an edible meat product (this section might be several paragraphs long and should put the results into the context of what has been done before). 
  3. Any limitations of the study, why might our results not be correct? 
  4. What is the overall conclusion? 
  5. Discussion of future directions.

***PLEASE NOTE, YOUR REPORT SHOULD BE FINALISED WITHIN TWO WEEKS OF COMPLETING
ALL EXPERIMENTAL WORK.***  

  




Method Summary

In this experiment, we attempted to replicate the study performed by Stout et
al 2021 (https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.05.28.446057v1.full).
DOLLY12 WCB MuSC were thawed into gelatin coated T25 flasks in serum
containing media. 24 h later, they were switched to different media
conditions. Cells were then passaged every 3 or 4 days and seeded into either
gelatin coated or vitronectin coated vessels. 24h after passaging, albumin was
added to B8 formulations. A 100% media change was performed every 48h. The 6
conditions tested were:

1.    gelatin coated, 1000 cells/cm^2, DMEM/F12 + 20% FBS + 1x P/S + 10uM p38i

2.    gelatin coated, 1000 cells/cm^2, E810C

3.    vitronectin coated, 1000 cells/cm^2, E810C

4.    vitronectin coated, 1000 cells/cm^2, Beefy-9

5.    vitronectin coated, 2500 cells/cm^2, Beefy-9

6.    vitronectin coated, 1000 cells/cm^2, Beefy-10C

Key findings

After switching to ACF media, conditions 4, 5, and 6 appeared to have more
dead, floating cells compared to others. At the first passage, E810C yielded
the best cell counts (~30k and 48k cells) from all the ACF media conditions.
However, this was still much lower than the serum control (~74k cells).

After the first passage, there did not seem to be any live cells visible in B8
media formulations. Although there were cells in E810C, there was an
insufficient amount to count them at the second passage. After this passage,
we observed no cell attachment (except for the serum control) so the
experiment was terminated.

In summary, none of the ACF media conditions (including our E810C control)
allowed cell survival and growth.

Discussion

We had previously seen low cell numbers when we switched cells to ACF media
(including our E810C control) in EPIC16782 .

This is the second time we have observed this unusual cell death in E810C.
This is in contrast to our original experiments where cells were able to
undergo 10 doublings in ACF.

To investigate this, we looked at the media reagents that were used when cells
in E810C had performed well versus when they did not perform as expected.
Although, this did not yield a clear issue/explanation, we suspected that the
FGF used recently could be the cause. We have not used FGF from Reprokine
before and suspected that this reagent was possibly not as potent as FGF from
PeproTech. However, when we tested this in EPIC20510, E810C containing FGF
from Reprokine and Peprotech both resulted in cell death. Therefore, further
investigation is required into ACF media ingredients is required.

It was also unexpected to see B8 formulations not perform well. However, this
could be because some of the reagents we used were different from Stout et al.
For example LAA2P, insulin, transferrin, TGFb and vitronectin.  For a more
detailed look at these differences, see the background info. The authors also
used bovine satellite cells which were at passage 2 whereas we used sheep
satellite cells which were at passage 9. So, a species-to-species differences
could also be playing a role.

Limitations and future directions

Working with small vessels for these experiments may not be ideal since it is
difficult to obtain a cell count from wells of a 24 well plate. After
centrifuging cells, the pellets are not visible which makes it difficult to
aspirate all the supernatant. Then, when pellets are resuspended, they must be
resuspended into small volumes (<50uL). A significant portion of this volume
(at least 5uL) needs to be used for cell counts. Therefore, there is a lot of
room for error/inaccuracy. In the future, continuous culture experiments
should be performed in T25 flasks or 6 well plates.

Also, we should order and use reagents that the authors used where possible
and attempt using our bovine cell lines for the 'Beefy-9' media formulation.

Overall conclusion

None of the ACF media conditions (including our E810C control) allowed cell
survival and growth. Further investigation into ACF media ingredients is
needed to identify the cause. The experiment should be repeated using reagents
that the authors used where possible and using our bovine cell lines.

  

  


