Key Result(s)


Normalised and time-matched data show the largest reduction in supernatant
cell number occured in the Chitosan 40 mg/L condition.


Discussion of Results


Data showed a decrease in supernatant cell count over time for all conditions
including no addition and vehicle control conditions, indicating that natural
settling occured over time. To account for this, conditions were compared to
their respective vehicle controls at matched time points to account for the
addition of buffer vehicle (at 1% v/v of the total cell suspension) and for
natural settling occuring over time. Normalised and time-matched data show the
largest reduction in supernatant cell number occured in the Chitosan 40 mg/L
condition.

No dose-dependent response was observed where cell density decreased with
increasing concentrations of flocculant. Buffers were hard to dissolve in the
recommended vehicle (a 1% acetic acid solutiuon). Higher concentrations may
not have pipetted accurately due to high viscosity and thus additive
concentrations may not be truly representative and may be a potential
explanation for a limited dose-dependent response.

Interestingly, supernatant cell count increased relative to time point and
vehicle matched control for the alginate 10mg/mL condition. It is possible
that this is an artefact due to accidental re-suspension of cells during
sampling.


Limitations


  * Buffers were hard to dissolve (even in recommended vehicle), it may be that higher concentrations did not pipette accurately due to high viscosity and additive concentrations may not be truly representative. Buffer preparation or choice of flocculant will be revisited to troubleshoot effective delivery
  * Flocculation was not strikingly visible by eye. Previously published data have shown far more effective flocculation compared to data here
  * Reduce conditions OR reduce time points to allow for replicates - this will ensure collection of more rigorous data. Time series can be added once buffer types have been narrowed
  * Higher density cell broth will be required to produce more conclusive results


Conclusion(s)


Flocculation is a promising method to decrease the volume of broth to process
for centrifugation and harvesting. This will in turn reduce the water content
of wet-mass harvests, decrease the centrifuge run time which may together,
increase the efficiency of harvesting process in general.


Future Direction(s)


Other flocculants suitable for trial include collagen, gelatin and plant
proteins.  Suitability criteria for future flocculants include food-safety,
price, availability, source (animal, natural or synthetic) and solubility.


