

Simple conclusion about what the results show you

MuSC adherence to zein appeared (observation, not significant) to decrease
from day 1 to day 7 for all proliferation media tested (9C, 10C, 11C, Serum)

MuSCs proliferated in 9C and 10C ACF media demonstrated better prolonged
adhesion than those proliferated in serum-containing media, based on Day 7
confluences.

Low confluence seen on day 1 (20-30%) may have been due to low seeding density
(0.7M rather than >0.8M) or cells being scraped off during the manual handling
involved with imaging.




Report

Discussion

On day 1, MuSC confluence on zein scaffolds was between 20 and 30% across all
media conditions (Figure 1). Confluence was assessed by LL viewing each side
of a DAPI-stained scaffold and rating it out of 100 based on cell coverage.
This confluence was lower than expected, given the scaffolds were seeded with
0.7 million cells and the calculated seeding efficiency was between 82.4 and
89.2% (see here). There are a few potential explanations for this. The ideal
seeding density based on previous experiments is >0.8 million cells per
scaffold, however cell harvest yielded fewer cells than expected resulting in
a lower seeding density per scaffold, one less replicate, and one less media
condition. The low harvest may have been due to uneven seeding of the 4CF
(noted in this lab book entry: https://au-mynotebook.labarchives.com/) and
observed low confluence of T175s (noted in this lab book entry: https://au-
mynotebook.labarchives.com/). To avoid this issue in future experiments, a
greater number of cells will be grown up for seeding. If flasks appear to not
be confluent enough on seeding day, seeding will be postponed by 24 hours to
allow for further proliferation. Adhered cells may also have been scraped off
by tweezers when handling the scaffolds for imaging. Moving forward, extreme
caution and tweezers with ultra-fine tips will be used when flipping the
scaffolds to image. In addition, analysing the images by eye introduced
potential for bias and error. This will be mitigated in future experiments by
the integration of Zaber with Mia, enabling FIJI analysis of the scaffolds.
Analysis for this experiment could be repeated using FIJI to verify results.
Zaber images becoming compromised also resulted in only n=1 of 10C, 11C and
serum being available for analysis for Day 1 samples. This bug has since been
fixed by the engineering team. Zaber imaging for 3D cultures was also tested
and optimised during this experiment to determine the best settings for
assessing cell confluence (see here). This will be highly valuable for future
scaffold screening experiments, and can also be used for microcarrier imaging.

On day 7, it appeared that MuSC confluence on zein had reduced for all
conditions, however the degree to which adherence decreased varied between
media types. However, due to limitations (i.e. reduced replicates), limited
statistically significant information can be inferred. MuSC confluence in 9C
and 10C did not appear to be significantly different from each other on Day 7
(Figure 1), however the large error bars make this a less definite conclusion.
Both conditions (9C and 10C) appeared to have significantly higher confluence
of MuSCs than those in serum conditions (Figure 1) on Day 7. MuSCs
proliferated in 11C appeared to be lower in confluence than those proliferated
in 9C and 10C on Day 7, however this result cannot be called significant due
to the reduced replicates. Due to the lack of replicates a full ANOVA was not
possible for determining whether there were any statistically significant
difference between the means.

Figure 1. Confluence of DOLLY12 MuSC on zerin scaffolds on Day 1 vs Day 7.
Error bars represent the standard deviation. Day 1 for 10C, 11C and Serum do
not have error bars due to complications with the Zaber resulting in only n=1
being analysed. Day 7 11C does not have error bars as all repliactes were
rated as having the same confluence.

Future directions with ACF media on zein scaffolds  

Moving forward, 10C will be used as the standard media for growing cells for
scaffold seeding experiments. While these results cannot show that it is
significantly better than the other growth media, observationally it appeared
to support prologned cell adherence in E6. It has also demonstrated the
highest proliferative ability of all ACF media tested in past experiments,
which will allow for a higher number of cells to be grown for scaffold
seeding.

To ensure minimal cell loss during imaging, manual handling should be
minimised as much as possible and performed extremely carefully. A seeding
density of >0.7M MuSCs per scaffold may also ensure a higher day 1 confluence.  

Concluding statement

Overall, these results suggest that cells proliferated in ACF media may
outperform those proliferated in serum-containing media in terms of both
initial and prolonged adherence to zein scaffolds in E6 differentiation
medium. However, due to low replicates, these results are simply observational
and cannot be called significant.


