Rational for our Study


We have limited time to achieve the scientific breakthroughs required to
launch a second product in by the end of 2023

In the next 3-6 months, we need to have identified our strategy to generate a
second product at Vow. This second product will be fundamentally different
from the nuvonis cell paste with respect to form. For example, nuvonis cell
paste is currently 95% water, while mince is approximately 70% water. We aim
to use biological tools to introduce additional texture or "bite" to our
cells, and get them to grow together in a form that is more complex than the
current cell paste that makes up the first product. This will require us to
substantially level up our understanding of tissue engineering methods and
their use at Vow.  
  
After achieving the necessary technical breakthroughs at an R&D level, we will
then need establish a method to scale our second product. This should be
considered during the R&D phase, given that we have limited time to develop
novel bioreactors and achieve scale (3 months allocated). We will then need to
either tech transfer these cells to our manufacturing partners at Ester Asco
in Singapore, who will assist with the subsequent scale-up, or scale-up in the
Vouse pilot plant, or scale-up in our new demo plant which is yet to be built
or work with a different manufacturing partner to achieve scale-up. (3 months
allocated). In tandem to the tech transfer process, we will need to achieve
regulatory milestones to be approved for scale, make plans for product
distribution, and establish our second product's marketing and branding
strategy.

To perform tissue engineering techniques, a large source of cells is
necessary. The use of suspension cell lines is currently the method for
growing cells at scale that we employ at Vow. While there are other options
(e.g. growing cells in aggregates, growing cells in adherent bioreactors like
the packed bed bioreactor), we already have the infrastructure and knowledge
in place to generate large amounts of suspension cells. The cells and media
program is also currently focused on developing new suspension-adapted cell
lines derived from egg cells or by genetic modification, which would provide
opportunities for varied species to be used in the second product. Thus, if at
all possible, generating cell mass through the use of expanding suspension-
adapted cells in a bioreactor appears the fastest method to arrive at a second
product.  
  
The question of using biological methods to combine cells in such a way that
they create a complex form is a technically complicated one, and one with
several possible solutions.  The next few months will aim to scientifically
determine which solution is most feasible by kicking off a variety of
projects. The projects support and compliment each other, and aim to arrive at
a complex piece of tissue in the shortest possible time. Any questions about
this technical brief, please direct to Katie Day.


Overview of the Projects:


See the attached notion document for an overview of how these projects fit
together: https://www.notion.so/vow/Technical-Brief-
Program-3-9dd1081d8d264d62ae161ab6b18eae97  
  
See this roadmap for the progression of our work:
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1rYTEImgXizj3JAo3cNtbo2d17q1jwqN8aYNpMpBYQpA/edit#gid=0


