

## Completed by: VP




Interpolation of values from standard curve to measure growth factor
concentration in unknown samples

Data from ELISA kit returned concentrations of growth factors per mL of tissue
lysate. All lysates used were prepared to a 1mg/mL concentration and so values
from ELISA results can be interpreted as ng or pg of growth factor per mg of
total protein.

Data were compiled and analysed using GraphPad Prism (ver 8.2.1). A standard
curve generated by fitting a sigmoidal 4-parameter curve (x is concentration)
to absorbance values with known concentrations. Standard curves plotted with
95% confidence bands.  Data for 'unknowns' were interpolated and concentration
(x) inferred from absorbance values, using the equation of the standard curve.
Data were analysed using a one-way ANOVA.

See attached for Prism file and analyses

Protein homology between growth factors used in manufacturing and growth
factors in Gallus gallus (chicken) and Coturnix japonica (Japanese quail)

The selected ELISA kits (Cloud Clone Corp) have been designed and validated to
detect a growth factors of a particular species. It is unclear if the kits are
able to accurately detect and quantify growth factors from a different
species. ELISA kits were selected to match the species of the growth factors
used in manufacturing. However, conventional meat samples were of different
species to the growth factors used in manufacturing. See Table 1 for a
comparison of growth factor species between samples. Protein homology was
measured by automated amino acid sequence alignment (Uniprot Align) (Fig 5).

Table 1.

SampleSpeciesUniprot ID  
IGF1  
Manufacturing growth factor (Vow cultured cells)Bos taurus

P07455  
  
Conventional chicken meatGallus gallus

P18254  
  
Conventional quail meatCoturnix japonica

P51462, A0A8C2UAQ3, A0A8C2UDA5  
  
EGF  
Manufacturing growth factor (Vow cultured cells)  
Homo sapien

P01133  
  
Conventional chicken meat  
Gallus gallus  

A0A1D5NX79  
  
Conventional quail meat  
Coturnix japonica  

A0A8C2T4N2 A0A8C2T5W6  
  
  

  




IGF homology data

  




EGF homology data

  

  

  

  




Next steps:

  * determine the acceptable and safe concentrations for EGF and IGF-1 in food products, and determine if concentrations measured here are acceptable
  * compare standard curve from kit to standard curve of known concentrations of EGF and IGF-1 variants used in manufacturing and Morsel production if this assay is repeated to confirm the accuracy of the kit in measuring these specific growth factor variants 


