

## Completed by: VP


Background


  


Aim/Purpose


To pilot test chemical flocculation methods to improve the efficiency and
speed of harvesting cells from large volumes (>10L) of cell suspension broth


Hypothesis


Addition of flocculants will reduce the number of cells in supernatant
compared to control conditions where no flocculants are added to the broth


Technical Gap


Efficient biomass recovery or harvesting of cells cultured in suspension
represents a critical bottleneck for large-scale bioprocess and manufacturing.
Vow's previous experience with cell harvest has only been of using bench-top
centrifuges in combination with 250-500mL bottles to pellet cells by
centrifugation. This approach becomes more time consuming and less practical
as cell suspension broth volumes increased with increased bioreactor capacity.
Recently, Vow has attempted harvesting using a continuous centrifuge where
broth is pumped into a bowl at a constant rate and supernatant drained
continuously. Flocculation by chemical addition is a simple, easy method to
increase the efficiency of harvesting by inducing the aggregation of cells by
neutralising membrane charges. For review, please see Matter et al 2019.
Effective flocculation will reduce total volume of broth for centrifugation,
and improve efficiency of recovery by reducing water content in the harvested
pellet.


Method/Procedure


Buffer preparation

Pea extract (prepared as described in Walker, Camarena & Freeman, 2007)

  1. Yellow split peas (Pisum sativum) were obtained from the local supermarket and ground using a household coffee grinder. 

  2. The ground peas were mixed in a 1:10 ratio with acetate buffer, pH 5.0, the resulting suspension was kept at 4°C for 20 min whilst stirring to extract the albumin proteins.

  3. After cooling the suspensions were centrifuged at 20 000 g in an ultracentrifuge for 10 min. 

  4. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet washed once in acetate buffer and once in deionised water. 

  5. The pellet was re-suspended in phosphate buffer, pH 8.0 and heated to 40°C for 20 min on a magnetic hotplate whilst stirring. 

  6. After cooling, the cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 20 000 g in a Beckman ultracentrifuge for 10 min.                                    

Avian collagen

  

BCA to determine pea extract concentration

  


