

## Completed by: Sam Rathbone (Bones)


Aim/Purpose


To determine the optimal carrier candidate for this cell line, in order to
optimise cell mass growth when grown in a adherent carrier based bioreactor
system


Hypothesis


The macro carriers will show greater proliferation but minimal cell mass
recovery, with the inverse true for micro carriers.


Technical Gap


  1. Limited experience working with carriers, either macro or micro, and may encounter difficulties.
  2. Many of the characteristics of these carriers are unknown due to limited information provided by the supplier.


Method/Procedure


BRIEF PROCEDURE OVERVIEW

  1. Prepare/reconstitute carriers
    1. Prepare glassware/containers: Glassware may need to be treated with siliconising reagents to limit loss of microcarriers to their surface
    2. If necessary, sterilise them according to the manufacturers instructions
    3. A media equilibration step may be required before use to flush out storage buffers and/or preservatives
  2. Prepare cell inoculum:
    1. Chose a model cell type and cell line that is kept consistent across all tests for all microcarriers as an initial screen
    2. Additional cell types and lines may be implemented as a second screen once we acquire data on the differences between cell types on each carrier
    3. Grow up a WCB to supply a uniform population of cells for all tests, or for as many tests as possible
    4. Grow the required cell number for each screening experiment from the WCB produced above.
    5. Seed the carriers with cell inoculum according to the manufacturer's instructions, if provided. Otherwise determine optimal seeding density/cm2 for 2D adherent cell culture and transfer appropriate amount of cells based on the surface area of the microcarrier.
  3. Add the seeded carriers to ultra low attachment plates
    1. 6-well ultra low attachment plate in a static format is the current preferred method here unless it doesn't make sense due to some limitation of the specific carrier(s) being tested
  4. Incubate on shaker plates at intermittent shaking routine
  5. Sample carriers at 1, 2, 5 and 7 days for DAPI and Live/Dead analysis.
  6. Harvest at 7 days.
  7. Carrier candidate that performed the highest in metrics and achieved minimal bench marks is transferred to scale up stage.





