Key Result(s)

  * doubling time in 3:1 mix at highest density reached was 24h 
  * maximum cell density reached in routine culture was ~3M cells/mL (97% viable)
  * total transfer time was 17 days


Discussion of Results


In this instance, technology transfer describes the critical aspect of moving
cell culture processes from onsite at Vow to commercial manufacturing at Esco
Aster, manufacturing partner in Singapore. The purpose of this EPIC was to
trial the tech transfer process at a smaller scale from Vow to offsite at the
Biologics Innovation Facility at The University of Technology Sydney.

Briefly, cryopreserved cells frozen in Freestyle media (as per GMP
specifications) were transported to UTS on dry ice and revived into Freestyle
'GMP' media. Cells were cultured as per the provided tech transfer protocol
initially obtained from Nuvonis (the parent company responsible for cell line
establishment) in 'GMP' media for 4 days. Following this period, a portion of
cells were cryopreserved as a MCB in GMP media. Cells were then cultured in a
mix of GMP media and an in-house media formulation at a ratio of 1:1 for ~4
days. Cells were then passaged in a 100% in house formulation after reaching
1M cells/mL density. Following this period, a portion of cells were
cryopreserved as a WCB in 3:1 media. This process was carried out over a total
of 17 days.

Data show that cells grew at a rate comparable to growth observed onsite at
Vow (24 hours). Maximum cell density, however, was of a much higher value than
previously observed under normal culture conditions (50k cells/mL seeding
density, 3-4 days passage in 3:1 RPMI:Hycell in house mix), where cells
typically reach a density of 1M cells/mL. Passaging cells at a higher density,
200k instead of 50-100k cells/mL, may easily increase final cell densities at
the end of a passage cycle.

These data form the groundwork on which a final tech transfer process can be
confirmed for transfer to manufacturing partner, Esco Aster, once an in-house
media formulation has been established and verified.


Conclusions, limitations & future directions


This EPIC provides a starting point from which to further refine tech transfer
protocols. However, this EPIC was limited by the lack of finalised and
validated in-house media formulation of choice. Thus, protocols may require
alteration depending on the performance and growth rate of the cells in a
different medium. This process should be trialled and validated once an in-
house formulation suitable for manufacturing has been established and
verified.





