

Completed by: Bonnie Tangey




Background

To date, we have thus far been unsuccessful in our attempts to adapt a cell
line to grow continuously and reproducibly in suspension culture. Our most
promising trial, in which we saw considerable proliferation of cells in
suspension over a period of several days, utilized embryonic quail cells in a
complete Nuvonis suspension culture media formulation (without or without the
addition of FGF2). See results here: https://au-
mynotebook.labarchives.com/share/Vow%2520-%2520R&D/OTk5OC4zMDAwMDAwMDAwMDF8MTA2MzE3Lzc2OTEtNjg4NTUvVHJlZU5vZGUvNDIyMjYzNjUyM3wyNTM4MC4z.
In the past, Vow has take the approach of trialing different media and culture
conditions to facilitate cells adaption to suspension culture however we have
had limited success. An alternative strategy is to identify which cells are
more readily adapted to suspension rather than identifying the perfect media
formulation or culture conditions to facilitate adaption.  

The reasons why some cells within a population, but not others are able to
adapt to suspension are still a mystery. It is likely however that the cells
that are able to adapt, have some genetic advantage. By attempting to adapt a
large number of cells to suspension at once, we increase the chances that some
of the cells in the large population have a mutation which is advantageous to
survival and proliferation in suspension culture.  

In this experiment, we will trial a low risk (low effort), high reward
strategy of attempting to culture large volumes of cells at once, in the hope
that some of the large number of cells, will be able to adapt and grow in
suspension.

We will work with embryonic cells as there is evidence to suggest that these
cells are naturally more amenable to growth in suspension culture than adult
cells. Supporting literature can be found in the background section of our
initial embryonic cell work here: https://au-
mynotebook.labarchives.com/share/Vow%2520-%2520R&D/ODEzOS4zfDEwNjMxNy82MjYxLTUxODIxL1RyZWVOb2RlLzIzMjM5OTQwNDV8MjA2NjEuMw==


