




## Performed by: Shaleen




Media/Reagents used:

  

NameDetails (reagent ID)  
0.1% gelatin solution  
  
Tryple  
  
dPBS (for washing & neutralising)  
  
Growth Media  
  
p38i (20mM stock)  
  
  
  

  




Version Change Log

NameChange Details  
V1 (original)N/A  
  
  




Process:

  1. Aliquotted 110mL of Basal Media made the previous day for carrageenan stock.
  2. Ficoll 70 at 650 mg/ml did not pass through a filter unit and hence was diluted to 455 mg/ml by adding 60mL of basal media to the 140 ml solution to make a total of 200mL
  3. The 455 mg/ml solution did not pass through a filter unit easily and hence the solution was finally diluted to 300 mg/ml by adding 103 ml to the 200ml solution.
  4. This solution was filtered and aliquotted into the respective dilutions as shown above. These 30ml aliquots were then split into 3 x 10 ml aliquots for the OT2 protocols
  5. A 140 ug/ml solution of Carrageenan in Basal Media was made by disolving 30.8 mg of Carrageenan in 110mL of Basal Media.
  6. The same process was repeated for Carrageenan as the Ficoll dilutions (see table above).
  7. During the OT2 protocol it was found that the Carrageenan had pelletted to the bottom of the concentrated tube affecting the mixing matrix of the DSD as a whole :(((




Observations/Summary:

Reasons for terminating experiment:

\- Residual ethanol from Carrageenan sterilisation might have made it into the
media (did not evaporate)

\- Carrageenan had pelletted to the bottom affecting the mix of matrices. This
was observed in the concentrated stock and so it is a possibility that this
may have happened before the dilutions making all dilutions invalid :(

\- Generally has been a messy DSD, things have been scrappy and not to the
standard I would like. This is a particularly important DSD and hence will be
repeated next week.

  

In future, the following criteria will be checked and ensured before starting
a DSD:

  * The highest concentration of a particular crowder than can pass through a filter unit or syringe filter.
  * Whether or not the crowder has indeed dissolved by leaving it stationary for at least one hour.




SOPs used:

  




Relevant Images/Figures (if applicable):

  


