Experimental Plan


Tissues for both experiments 4 and 5 have been matured for 10 days. Tissue
formation looks good from a qualitative assessment of tissue structure and
integrity. Tissues will now be characterised using a variety of methods which
are outlined here. Given the small amount of tissue (2 replicates per cell
density), we will be maximising the amount of analyses that we can perform on
the tissue.

N.B. Tissue harvest for experiment 5 will be ad hoc, due to incorrect cell
numbers used in the tissue seeding and poor tissue formation. A few tissues
may be harvested to understand ultra-high cell density, but not an essential
experiment to analyse

  

Figure 1. Tissue preparation methods for mini-tissue experiment 5


Methods


Buffer Preparation

Fixation Buffer -  4% Paraformaldehyde in PBS

  

Other preparation

  1. Prepare 12 labelled Eppendorf tubes for snap freezing
  2. Prepare 2x labelled 12 well plates for initial PBS wash and fixation

Tissue Harvest

  1. Cut tissues with a scalpel or fine scissors at the "cut point" and remove from the mould with forceps
  2. In a clean petri dish, cut tissues as per figure 1 above
  3. Place samples into PBS for further prep

Fixation (for Microscopy)

  1. Fix tissue in a 12 well plate in 4% PFA in PBS (Fixation buffer) overnight at 4degs
  2. Following day, wash 3x5mins in PBS
  3. Store tissue in PBS + 0.02% Sodium Azide in 4degs

Fixed tissue will be taken to UNSW in 70% Ethanol for tissue processing,
paraffin embedding, sectioning and some slides (every other?) will be used for
H&E staining and subsequent slide-scanning.

Snap Freezing (for Molecular Analyses)

  1. Tissue segment for snap-freezing will be further cut into 2 or 3 pieces (depending on handling ease)
  2. Each portion will be placed into an Eppendorf tube
  3. Snap-freeze Eppendorf tubes in liquid nitrogen for 3-5 seconds each
  4. Place in the -80 freezer

Snap frozen tissues will be used for proteomic analysis and possibly other
molecular analyses at a later date (when we have built up a larger number of
samples)


