

Below is a dummy header entry to be copy and pasted into all new EPIC pages in
Lab Archives. Please complete the Link to Clubhouse, Aims and Hypothesis
BEFORE you begin the experiment.

At the completion of any EPIC please do the following:  
1\. Ensure all sections of this page are complete  
2\. Email a link to this page to the project leader  
3\. Project leaders will then review all information and digitally sign this
page (click the screwdriver and wrench icon in the top right of this page)  
4\. Project leaders should then send a link to the signed page to James Ryall




LINK TO CLUBHOUSE EPIC PAGE:

LINK TO AIRTABLE ENTRY PAGE:  

RELATED TO OKR:  Please provide the OKR that this EPIC is progressing towards

AIM/PURPOSE: To determine whether the topping up of Nuvonis media with glucose
and ala-L-gln when glucose levels drop below a given threshold maximises cell
density.

HYPOTHESIS: That adding glucose and ala-gln when glucose levels drop below
4.5g/L will result in maximum cell density.

RESULTS SUMMARY: State the key take-aways from the experiment in 1-2 sentences

CONCLUSIONS: State whether your hypothesis was supported or not. In some
instances, the hypothesis will be less relevant, so this will be less
important (e.g. generating WCBs). If your EPIC is not a hypothesis-driven
research experiment, you can state that this is a "process" in the header's
aim, and indicate "NA" for the hypothesis & conclusions.

NEXT STEPS: Bullet points should be used to indicate what experiments (if any)
will be completed as a direct result of this experiment. In addition, you
should think about how the experiment could be done better next time (e.g. if
I was to repeat this experiment I would include an additional timepoint at day
5 to understand whether the number of Myogenin positive cells decreased before
myotube delamination occurred"

[NOTE: Where appropriate, please indicate WHO will take responsibility and put
a date for completion. (e.g. "James will create an SOP detailing the new
methodology by the end of August 2021" or "Tom will repeat the experiment on
18th November 2021")

  


