Background (fibroblasts in suspension)


In an attempt to achieve higher cell densities than adherent culture can
offer, we are aiming to adapt muscle-derived fibroblasts (commonly known as
myofibroblasts) in vitro from adherent culture to suspension culture. Adherent
culture limits the cell density by the surface area of the culture dish in the
2D system, whereas by adapting the cells to a suspension culture, they are
only limited by the volume of media within a shake flask, which will allow a
much higher density.

  

In pharmaceutical development, CHO cells are commonly used which was initially
an adherent-dependent cell line which has been adapted to suspension culture
and is now commonly used interchangeably based on the desires of the
laboratory using them (see Thermo Fischer).

Suspension culture allows a higher seeding and harvesting density of cells per
mL of Growth Media:

Adherent culture:

  * Seeding density = 164,000 cells / mL (in a T175 flask at 4.9x10⁶ cells / cm2 in a T175 in 30mL of culture media)
  * Harvest density = 777,000 cells / mL (in 30mL within a T175 = a total harvest ratio of 135,000 cells / cm2)
  * (see values for T175)

Suspension culture:

  * Seeding density = 500,000 cells / mL is used as a guideline (see Point 8.)
  * Harvest density (whilst not recorded, should be >777,000 cells / mL [that of adherent culture] after a few population doublings)

  

Whilst the numbers quoted above are general guidelines provided and not cell-
line-specific, it is clear to see the benefit of suspension culture over
adherent culture in obtaining higher cell densities. Higher cell densities
will allow Vow to generate production-suitable cell lines that can be used to
feed people at scale, using fewer adherent culture vessels and less growth
media.

Microcarriers have been used at Vow to increase the surface area of culture
for MuSCs in vitro which allows higher seeding/harvest efficiencies. Whilst
MuSCs are adherent-dependent, they also need to maintain the ability to
differentiate and fuse, which can be lost through single cell suspension
culture. Luckily, fibroblasts do not need to maintain any ability to
differentiate and may be able to be adapted to suspension culture and are
therefore a better candidate for suspension culture to achieve higher cell
mass rather than maintaining a specific phenotype or morphology throughout the
process.




How?

There is limited literature on the process for adapting adherent-dependent
cells to a suspension culture, but we can take information from multiple
sources to generate ideas on how best to approach the adaptation.

Whilst there is an indication that cells can be isolated from a skin biopsy
and grown in suspension culture immediately (see paper attached), this may be
an avenue we want to investigate when we have more biopsies coming in. For the
moment, we need to focus on the adherent fibroblast cell lines that we have in
culture now.

Researchers have induced fibroblast aggregate formation by rotational culture
(see Furukawa et al, 2001), where they used medium was supplemented with
insulin, dexamethasone, and basic fibroblast growth factor. These cells were
only cultured for a total of 24-36 h before being harvested and inoculated on
a polyglycolic acid/collagen scaffold for artificial skin, which doesn't give
us much detail on prolonged culture conditions. Furukawa et al. identified
that insulin, dexamethasone, and basic fibroblast growth factor potentiate the
secretion of extracellular matrices and hence the formation of aggregates was
expected to be promoted. These are 3 factors that we likely want to avoid, in
an attempt to avoid cellular aggregation and to promote a single cell
suspension culture. Their culture was performed in 35mm dishes at 80 RPM (no
mention of throw).

iPS (induced-pluripotent stem) and ES (embryonic stem) cells have been
reportedly cultured in suspension conditions in an almost fully defined serum-
free culture medium (Olmer et al. 2010). Their culture medium contains Rho-
associated coiled-coil kinase (ROCK) inhibitor (RI) which can prevent
apoptosis and support cell survival during the expansion. These cells were
harvested from a feeder-layer and were then treated with collagenase B
solution (1mg/mL) to dissociate aggregates and result in a single cell
suspension. Using collagenase as a digestive enzyme to break down collagen
bonds could be a potential addition to our harvesting methods to prevent
aggregation and promote single cell suspension. Every 4 days, the aggregates
were treated with Collagenase B and dissociated into single cells.

The Growth Media consisted of mTeSRTM 1 (Stem cell technologies) supplemented
with RI (10µM). mTeSRTM is similar to Essential 8 Media (Gibco), but contains
Bovine serum albumin and bovine holo-transferrin which makes it almost fully
defined serum-free culture medium. Since we will maintain the use of FBS in
this attempt we may only supplement with RI (ROCK inhibitor).

In 1957, a researcher achieved suspension culture of strain L mouse
fibroblasts in a glass stirred tank vessel (see Danes, 1957). The method was
using 20mL of Growth Media (comprising of 40% Horse Serum and 10% Chicken
embryo extract) as well as using conditioned media from the cells growing in
adherent culture. Every 12 hours, 25% of media was added to the culture and
cell numbers did increase over the length of the adaptation process. A high-er
serum content may be something we want to approach after our initial attempts,
as well as a more regular feeding schedule.

Anti-clumping agent is a solution used commonly in pharmaceutical production
with suspension cells (usually CHO cells, Chinese Hampster Ovary cells) to
minimise clumping of cells and encourage single cell suspension. According to
Thermo Fisher, Pluronic F-68 (BASF) is a surfactant that decreases cell
membrane shearing in insect suspension culture, which can be useful in
minimising cell death due to shear stress.

There is some literature around integrin binding which relates to the
receptors used by animal cells to bind to the extra cellular matrix. Since
integrins help cells bind to an ECM, it is possible that by providing the
cells in suspension with additional integrins, that may saturate the cells'
ECM-receptors and render them able to proliferate without attachment to a
substrate. Similarly, the integrin-binding domain present within many ECM
proteins is RGD, some examples of which are fibronectin, vitronectin,
fibrinogen, osteopontin and bone sialoprotein (Bellis, 2012).

(see Molecular biology of the cell, 4th edition)

According to Otsuji et al. (Otsuji et al, 2014), methylcellulose (MC) reduces
the aggregation of cell clumps, which may be a potential candidate for our
studies. They found the best concentration of MC 0.3-0.6% (w/v) in the growth
media as a best compromise between the fusion repression and viscosity
increase. This may be a property we want to test in our suspension culture
system.

  

Some key factors to add to our growth media:

  * ROCK inhibitors
  * Anti-clumping agent
  * Integrins
  * RGD proteins (such as fibronectin, vitronectin, fibrinogen, osteopontin and bone sialoprotein)
  * Methylcellulose

Alternative methods of encouraging single cell suspension:

  * Filter cell suspension through 70um cell strainer (As performed in previous experiment)
  * Digest cells with collagenase B upon harvest to dissociate aggregates and re-seed in fresh media after collagenase exposure


