

In the past 6 months at Vow we have run numerous nucleofection experiments
where we have transfected RNP complexed Cas9 with various gRNAs into CHOMP
cells. This was done with the intention to knock down key genes we
hypothesized would give rise to a suspension and/or an immortal phenotype.

Initial experiments involved mutating 1-2 genes at a time in cells using this
RNP method. The experiments involved transfecting the cells with the CRISPR
system using a neon nucleofection machine, Validating transfection success
using GFP-tagged Cas9 enzyme and imaging, then validating mutation success by
sanger sequencing PCR products of the mutated region.

Cells were recovered for 3 days post nucleofection in serum containing media
(DMEM/F12+20% FBS) then transferred to 50mL shaker tubes containing nuvonis
suspension media (Hycell media + 10% KSR + IGF1-LR3 + b-FGF) at a density of 1
million cells/mL. Over the course of our nucleofection experiments we
subjected tubes containing cells with various mutations various speeds
including 120rpm, 150rpm, 190rpm and 210 rpm. None of our experiments yeilded
a successfully adapted and thriving suspension cell line. Our most promising
response to suspension adaption we saw was in CHOMP cells containing mutations
to the ZIC1 gene. These cells saw a noticeable recovery of cell number in
suspension compared to our control samples. However this recovery was short
lived and the cell number began to plateau, indicating senescence in the cell
culture. We hypothesis that this was due to a lack of immortality in the cell
line.

Through these experiments we made a few key learnings that will inform the
future of our gene editing experiments.

  1. We are able to successfully edit genes in our CHOMP cell lines using our annotated crocodile genome found on the NCBI database 
  2. We know that mutating genes can produce observable phenotypic effects (as evidenced by the ZIC1 response) 
  3. Our methods for validating mutation success are slow and need to be improved to give us confidence in our gene edits. 
  4. Our throughput for testing various genes and their impact on suspension adaption is low throughput with our current transfection system. We have only focused on up to 4 edits in one cell at any time. 
  5. Editing genes to produce an immortal phenotype will compound our edits to produce a suspension adapted phenotype. 

From these learnings we want to continue to improve our gene editing platform
in the following ways

  1. Increase the throughput of our gene editing from 4> genes per cell to >50 
  2. Start with a larger pool of cells and move them all straight to suspension after nucleofection
  3. We want to improve our mutation detection pipeline to validate our CRISPR function quicker. 
  4. We want to continue focusing on adapting CHOMP to suspension through this platform given our success in mutating this cell line already. 

I hypothesis that by targeting more genes and introducing the cells to their
environmental selective pressures immediately we will encourage mutations
benefiting suspension adaption.  
  
Therefore we have set the following goal for our next gene editing experiment.  
  
Perform a suspension adaptation experiment following a CRISPR screen for >100
genes in our CHOMP cells.


