Report Checkbox
Key findings


  * Sum up the results and the meaning of the findings as succinctly as possible into bullet points, this could be a short paragraph or a single line. Copy this to your Header Info pages under the Result Summary section.  
  
  

  * If the experiment was unsuccessful, don't over-complicate the results. Concisely explain why it was not successful and add any key learnings/optimisations that will be taken forward.  
  
Why? Key findings are surmised at the very top of the report page to quickly
provide the reader with the main take-aways from the work and whether or not
the aim was was achieved.


Discussion


Use this section as an opportunity to explain your interpretation of the
results. Include whether any limitations experienced may have influenced the
results.

  * It is useful for the reader to re-state at the beginning of your discussion what the purpose of the experiment was, so that it is clear whether this has been met or not.  
  

  * Discuss the implications for the findings (i.e. how do the findings fit into our final goal of producing an edible meat product) and the potential reasons that the results might have worked out this way. Justify your interpretations (reference literature or previous experiments here) but do not state interpretations as fact.  
  

  * Be critical, are there any competing factors that may have interfered with the experiment and influenced the results? If so, state them and explain their potential impact on the perceived results. This may tie into next steps (ways to improve the experimental design to mitigate those risks).  
  

  * Imagine you are reading this report for the first time with no knowledge of the experiment but want to know the key results and what they mean.  
  

  * Discuss any limitations that may have impacted your work - explain their potential impact on the results and how that affects your interpretation.  
  

  * Link to sensory report if there was one.  
  
  
Why? This section prompts us to understand why our results turned out a
certain way and subsequently may provide crucial insight on how we can improve
outcomes and better inform our future research efforts.


Future work


Provide a short paragraph or bullet points indicating what experiments (if
any) will be completed as a direct result of this experiment e.g. repeats, new
conditions, troubleshooting etc and if relevant what would be improved upon
for next time. Where possible set a timeline for this work and who will lead
the work.

Why? This section allows us to effectively pick up the work where it was left
off, while benefiting from previous learnings so that mistakes are not
repeated.


