Aim:


To determine the concentration of Ficoll PM 70 that produces the highest yield
of deposited collagen in Nuvonis fibroblast cultures.


Background:


Ficoll PM 70 has been a top candidate among the macro molecular crowders
tested at Vow thus far and in literature. We have employed concentrations
recommended by literature to varying success, however it was seen through
preliminary experiments there was room for optimisation with the
concentrations of Ficoll PM 70. To elaborate, although some ECM deposition was
seen in cell monolayer sheets, a portion of the ECM still remained suspended
in the media.

Next, a combinatorial concentration study was performed to understand the
ideal concentration for either Ficoll PM 70 and Ficoll PM 400 alone or in
combination. Wherein, the ideal scenario would be that all of the ECM
generated is deposited into the cell sheet rather than into the media.
Overall, the data from the combinatorial experiment was mostly inconclusive.
However one replicate showed an increase in collagen deposition when the
concentration of crowders (both individually and in combination) was
increased. This finding, if significant, would indicate that the highest yield
of collagen is yet to reach a point of saturation and the concentration of
both Ficoll crowders could be increased further still to beneficial effect.

Considering the peak collagen deposition effect of Ficoll PM 70 may not have
been reached, the current experiment aimed to investigate increased
concentration ranges with the intention of achieving a bell curve like
response in terms of ECM production, with a clear undersaturated (low),
oversaturated (too high) and the peak effect of Ficoll PM 70.


Results:
  
  
Figure 1: Collagen deposition across various concentrations of Ficoll PM 70.
Each concentration consists of 10 replicates.


Discussion:
  
  
Due to cell detachment during the fixing process and collagen assay, the
accuracy of the quantitative data was greatly affected. Cell monolayers were
detached and broken to various extents due to multiple pipetting steps
necessary in the fixing and collagen assay. Hence, Figure 1 suggests there is
no distinct difference between any of the concentrations of Ficoll PM 70.

Observationally however, a clear gradient of thicker, denser pale-white ECM
sheets were seen with a peak at 120-140 mg/ml of Ficoll PM 70 and a slow
decline thereafter. This difference was not photographed as it was assumed the
collagen data would be much more telling than a photograph, however in
practice there were complications. Figure 2 below is an illustration of the
macroscopic increase in ECM observed in the well plates.

Due to the fragile nature of the cell monolayers, an alternative method for
analysis will likely be needed in future. While the collagen assay is
relatively quick and direct, it often involves frequent manual pipetting steps
which (due to monolayer detachment) jeopardises the integrity of the data. In
future, perhaps some form of direct stain that does not require fixing and
washing would be ideal. If not, perhaps qualitative data in the form of high
quality pictures of the cell monolayers may have to suffice.

  


  
  


Conclusion/Next steps:
  
  
In future, a more direct stain analysis method for collagen that does not
involve washing steps will be investigated. If such an assay does not exist,
including more detail in quantitative observation such as high quality images
and descriptions may have to suffice for future DSDs.

In light of the 120-140 mg/ml concentration range producing the
macroscopically thickest cell sheets, this learning will be implemented into a
production run to generate biomass for the Product team to validate and
investigate. This will provide clarity on whether scale up work is needed on
the cell sheet format.


