Who performed the work: XXXX XXXXXX


Why? Accountability and so the reader/reviewer knows who to address in follow
up comments and questions.


Cell IDs and location


If cells are being used in this protocol ensure that Cell IDs and the
incubator location are stated. If cells are being transferred to a new vessel
include a passage cell ID table.  

Cell IDs

Location  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Why? This is included for traceability purposes and to inform lab users what
cells to use in the protocol and where to find them (thus reducing chance of
error)


Protocol followed


List the protocol used, broken down into sequential steps (using appropriate
templates), as well as any changes made to the protocol.

Include plate maps/diagrams, as well as any relevant widgets or calculators.

Note - Timestamps are not necessary but are encouraged on critical time
sensitive steps, such as fixation and staining with antibodies.  

Why? Having a clear step-by-step protocol for the lab user to follow will
reduce chance of error such as accidentally missing out steps. Timestamps on
critical steps act as a reminder to the user, and provide a good reference in
instances when a protocol fails e.g. if fixing and staining of a sample did
not work we can come back to the timestamps to ensure that timings were
accurate, if they were accurate we can assume that the timings need to be
adjusted or that the consumables or samples themselves were at fault.


Observations (notes, limitations, changes, optimisations)


Include notes and observations taken on the day including visual or handling
observations (i.e. cells appeared to clump, material changes colour or changed
in size) as well as any limitations encountered, optimisations or changes made
to the protocol, pictures or videos of the experimental setup  
  
Why? Good observations and notes on changes ensure experiment reproducibility

and the optimisation of future work


Images taken


Section to add any microscopy images of samples, or photographs taken of
experimental set up  
  
Why? To support observations and act as a reference to help ensure experiment
reproducibility




Why? The protocol check box provides a quick yes/no visual to the reader as to
whether the protocol went to plan or not.


