Introduction:


Both Ficoll PM 70 and Ficoll PM 400 have been top candidates among the macro
molecular crowders tested at Vow thus far and in literature [1]. We have
employed concentrations recommended by literature for both of these crowders
to varying success, however there still remains room for optimisation of these
concentrations as while some ECM deposition is seen in sheets, a portion of
the ECM remains suspended in the media. Moreover, this was demonstrated in
crowded growth media containing a high amount of serum, and the concentrations
determined in serum may not translate directly to the newfound ACF formulation
we have developed. Thus, a concentration study was required to understand the
ideal concentration for each crowder with the intention that all of the ECM
generated is deposited into the cell sheet rather than the media. Moreover, a
combinatorial approach to MMC has shown success in literature and hence was
assessed in this experiment.


Results:
  
  
Figure 1: Plate map depicting the combination concentrations of Ficoll PM 70
(left)/Ficoll PM 400 (right) for each well.  
  
Figure 2: Raw absorbance data for all three replicate plates represented in a
heat map format. All plates were run on the Spectrostar Nano with the Collagen
assay setting for 540nm endpoint absorbance. Higher absorption is represented
by a darker green colouring.  
  
  


Discussion:


Three replicate 48 well plates were run in this experiment. Of the three well
plates, it is clear two of the plates do not show any significant differences
between conditions. However, one of the three plates depicts a slight increase
in collagen production which peaks at the highest concentration of F70
concentration. This shows that collagen deposition (and possibly production)
increases with increasing amount of crowders, where the specific combination
of the crowders may be agnostic and rather hinges on Ficoll PM 70
specifically.

Moreover, what is seen in this replicate plate is not a bell curve like
collagen deposition response, where a clear peak is seen with all increasing
concentrations thereafter showing a lesser/negative effect. Rather what is
seen here is increasing collagen deposition with increasing Ficoll molecules
in the media that possibly has not yet reached a point of saturation. Hence,
there likely remains higher concentrations of Ficoll to be explored to push
the collagen deposition to it's peak.

While any conclusive statements cannot be made at this stage regarding the
best combination of Ficoll - higher concentrations of Ficoll PM 70 should be
assessed in a repeated experiment to monitor a peak of collagen
production/deposition.


Conclusion:


Due to the lack of replicates, no conclusive statements regarding Ficoll's
best concentration/combination can be made. However, the increasing gradient
found in one of the replicate plates warrants further investigation with
higher concentrations of Ficoll. Next steps will include precisely this, with
Ficoll's tested either in combination or isolation.


References:


[1] Ellis, R., 2001. Macromolecular crowding: obvious but underappreciated.
Trends in Biochemical Sciences, 26(10), pp.597-604.


