

Given that our way of nucleofecting cell lines is limited by our neon
nucleofection format at present, we decided to consult with IDT on the scale
of CRISPR screen we could run in house.

In our first meeting we covered a few basic questions around whether IDT could
support the scale of this experiment for us.  
See meeting notes here https://www.notion.so/vow/IDT-CRISPR-screen-
meeting-40018ee16fd74bf288dda9be7fd99d43  
  
Since this meeting we have learned the following things about IDT and there
processes that inform the design of our experiment.

  1. IDT can supply us with a pooled gRNA sample of up to 2000 guides at the concentrations listed on their website. 
  2. IDT can produce single or pooled gRNA samples in 96 well plates for us to then pool ourselves if we desire
  3. IDT can not design guides for us without us giving them the full gene sequence for a gene of interest. 
  4. IDT's guide design service is $40 an hour with the first two hours free, The sydney contact Sean Poh affirms that we can get this cost reduced with a large enough order. 

Most recently we jumped on a call with Adam from IDT's Commercial Product
Manager for Genomic Medicine & CRISPR to learn more about the limitations of
using CRISPR guides at such low concentrations if we were to pool up to 2000
of them for a nucleofection experiment. (see meeting notes here
https://www.notion.so/vow/IDT-Discussing-limitations-in-pooled-CRISPR-
experiments-ef22a76d5c904cd3b9b5d4d1326bd250)

From this call we learned a few key takeaways about large scale CRISPR
screens.

  1. IDT suggested that complexing gRNA with Cas9 enzyme BEFORE pooling them will lead to greater cleavage efficiency per guide. (IDT validated this with up to 4 guides). 
  2. CRISPR success per guide can be scaled linearly with volume and cell number. (i.e if you get 90% cleavage efficiency with 1uL of guide and 1000 cells, you should get the same efficiency with 100uL of guide and 1,000,000 cells).
  3. Limitations in cleavage efficiency can be offset by scaling cell number in our experiment.
  4. gRNA and Cas9 enzymes should be mixed in a molar ratio of 2:1 to ensure cleavage efficiency due to errors in chemical synthesis that cause truncated sequences in the guide pool.
  5. Validating cleavage with a Mismatch Cleavage Assay would be a quick, qualitative, way to validate mutations without waiting for sequencing results. 

From these discussions It makes sense to trial validating mutation success
using diluted gRNA using one guide we have confidence in from earlier
experiments. This experiment would give us a quick gRNA concentration capable
of producing mutation success that we could use to estimate the gRNA
concentrations in our pooled CRISPR screen.

  


