Experimental Plan Written by:   Varshana                          Date:  15 Aug 22


Why? Accountability and so the reader/reviewer knows who to address in follow
up comments and questions.


Reviewed by: XXXX XXXXXX  Date: XXXXXXXX


Why? It is important that the experimental plan is reviewed prior to
experiment start, this is because a reviewer may be able to pick up on key
errors or oversights. An example of such an oversight would be an experiment
that has been planned without sufficient replicates or controls to determine
if an outcome is significant. Or perhaps the reviewer will be able to simplify
the experiment, by reducing cell demand and/or experiment duration, which
would help us to reach our goals in a more efficient manner.


Aim:


AIM/PURPOSE:

  * To investigate the effect of TGFb on inducing ECM deposition and tissue stiffening in Nuvonis tissue discs. 

  
Why? TGF-b showed some promise observationally, in terms of tissue stiffness
and integrity. Mitogens like TGF-b will increase proliferation, while at the
same time activating fibroblasts and triggering matrix deposition. We aim to
determine whether we can further increase the biomass and improve the texture
with treatment.


Hypothesis:


HYPOTHESIS:

Tissue formation and integrity will be improved with GF treatment and the
metrics to answer this hypothesis will be:

  * Increase in contraction of the tissue disc (observational) overtime, with the contraction increasing dose-dependently. 
    * Measured by: by taking images daily (vow tablet) where we observe increased contraction overtime. 
  * Increase in biomass of the tissue disc compared to untreated control, and an expected dose-dependent increase in biomass with increasing concentrations of TGFb. 
    * Measured by weighing at the time of harvest. 
  * Increased regions of compact tissue-like regions when observing cell distribution and evidence of myofibroblast differentiation
    * Measured by microscopy and histological immunostainning and analysis.  
  * Consistent cell viability across conditions, with the highest concentration condition to have a detrimental impact on cell viability
    * Measured by quantifying the percentage of apoptotic/ dead cell population measuring using Flow Cytometry. 


Background
  
Y/N     LinksJustification  
Is this a continuation of a previous experiment/series of work?  Yes
Continuation of Mini Tissue Project - Tissue Disc Iteration following  
Experiment CWhy is this being continued i.e. what did we find out before and
what are we hoping to find out now, what is being changed in this experiment?  
  
From experiment tissue disc C we found:

  * 0.2M NaOH was observed to create the stiffest tissue (with ultra high cell density) and thus will continue to be used in future tissue disc experiments. 
  * Thus the tissue density and gelation optimisation using NaOH has been trialed. To now further improve tissue stiffness we will explore treatment inclusion which has been previously TGF-b showed some promise observationally, in terms of tissue stiffness and integrity.  

  
  
Is the experiment based on findings from literature research?NoN/AWhy do we
think that this is worth investigation. What is the knowledge gap?  
  
Ultra high density experimentation with this scaffold form factor and
treatment inclusion (using growth factors) has not previously been published.  
  
  

Variable* (include full names not just abbreviations)  

Description (e.g. what concentrations are being tested)

n = Culture ConditonDuration in Culture

Justification

 Relevant links (e.g. to literature and/or product pages)  
1a  
1b0 ng/mL TGFb + 0ug/mL Vit. C  
2

Scaled up tissue engineering experiment (6cm discs) at 40M cells/mL

(1 Bn cells/tissue).

Gel set at 37C 5% CO2

Analysis: weight, flow cytometry (live dead analysis), microscopy (cell
distribution).

  
8 day maturation (first 48 hours in Phenol Red containing GM)  
  
Sample number 2 will harvested at day 4 or day 7  flow cytometry stain and
harvest optimisation.  
negative control Prior tissue disc experiment B and C clearly indicate the
expected stiffness we predict to observe in untreated tissues, as baseline to
observe any qualitative/ quantitative changes.  
20 ng/mL TGFb + 150ug/mL Vit. C  
1"8 day maturation (first 48 hours in Phenol Red containing GM)  
Vitamin C only vitamin C value based on the level used by the Process
Development team during their CHOMP expansions. TGFb is based on past
treatment work and literature.  
  
3 10 ng/mL TGFb +150ug/mL Vit. C  
1""trialing a wide range of concentrations to ensure we can easily observe
differences between conditions and whether there is a maximum dosage until
TGFb has a deterimental effect on tissue formation and cell viability. This
observation will be easier to determine/ compared across a wide range versus
conditions with incremental increases in treatment.'  
420 ng/mL TGFb + 150ug/mL Vit. C  
1""" '  
550 ng/mL TGFb + 150ug/mL Vit. C  
1""" '  
6100 ng/mL TGFb + 150ug/mL Vit. C  
1"" positive control/ extreme to observe any potential detrimental effects of
high TGFb'  
  
*factor that is to be manipulated, controlled for, or measured in an experiment e.g. media additive or seeding density  
  
Why? Including a background section provides justification for why certain
research choices were made and prompts you to ensure that this is an
appropriate research direction i.e. one which will likely assist us in
reaching our goals. This is important to the reader/reviewer as well as to
project leads and ultimately investors, ensuring that our time, money and
energy is being put to good use.


Methods


Concisely and clearly describe the experiment design, ensure that the
following information has been included:  
  
What combination of factors are being tested? (if relevant use a table to
demonstrate this)  
  

Replicate number

Cell type/s

Experiment

duration

Timepoints

Total number of cells needed  
(total required = 7,000 M)

Number and type of vessels required*

Controls

Base media

Method/s of measurement

Quantitative or qualitative**  
  
1-a Suspension Nuvonis cells 8 day maturation17 Aug - 100% Feed  
19 Aug - 100% Feed  
21 Aug - 100% Feed  
23 Aug -  Harvest 1,000 M1Negative controlPRF DMEM/F12 + 1X P/S + 1:100
Glutamax + 1:1000 IGF + 1:5000 EGF (Mesokine)Analysis:  
  
1) contraction (observational with images of tissues taken every 48 hours
during feeds)  
  
2) Biomass change (at harvest, mass weighed),  
  
3) flow cytometry (apoptotic and dead % cell population),  
  
 4) microscopy (cell distribution and immunostaining).both  
1-b"4 or 7 day maturation ""1Negative control replicate  
""  
2"8 day maturation""1Vitamin C only  
""  
3""""1  
  
"  
  
4""""1  
  
"  
  
5""""1  
  
"  
  
  
6

""" "1'positive' control  
"  
  
  
*number does not include vessels required for cell expansion prior to testing variables  
**will the results retrieved be quantitative (data that can be
counted/measured using numbers and can be used to calculate significance) or
qualitative (cannot be counted/measured/expressed easily using numbers,
results are more observational and open to interpretation)  
  
Why? The tabulated information above represents the critical information
required to be repeat the experiment and interpret the findings. Thus, it is
important that it is documented clearly for reproducibility purposes. Note -
it is preferred that experiments generate quantitative data, if the experiment
only results in qualitative findings please take time to reassess the
experimental plan, can a quantitative method be used? will qualitative
findings be sufficient to decided whether the outcomes are successful or not?
how can you limit bias and error in recording these findings?  
  


Plate map (or other relevant diagram):


Why? Clear and easy to follow thus minimising chance of error


Timeline


Daily breakdown of tasks in table form.

Day

Task  
  
15 Aug 22Seeding Day  \- Seed 7x tissue discs according to the experimental
plan above.  
16 Aug 22Observe change in growth medium colour, remove phenol red and
determine the optimal feed scedule depending on the colour change after
seeding. e.g. Increasing the volume required in each feed or moving into daily
feeds,  
17 Aug 22100% Feed 7x cultures and monitoring  
19 Aug 22100% Feed 7x cultures and monitoring  
  
19 Aug 22Harvest 1b tissue disc condition for flow cytometry  
Weigh (scalre)  
Fix in 4% PFA  
Conduct Live Flow Cytometry Analysis  
21 Aug 22100% Feed 7x cultures and monitoring  
  
23 Aug 22Harvest  
\- Fix portion for microscopy  
\- Fix portion of tissue for omics  
\- weigh tissue  
\- take a sample for Flow cytometry preparation  
\- Conduct Live Cell Flow cytometry  
TBD Take sample for omics  
  
TBD Take sample for sectioning and H&E staining (Garvan)  
  
TBDImmunostaining sections (in house) and fluorescent imaging  
  
Why? Clear and easy to follow thus minimising chance of error


