  
  
Written by: Bonnie Tangey




Avian Egg Candling  
  
Candling is the word used to describe the process of holding an egg flush
against a bright torch in order to assess how embryonic development is
progressing. It should be performed in a completely dark room for the best
visualisation and eggs should be handled extremely gently to avoid disrupting
the embryos. Note that for eggs with dark or blue/green shells, candling may
not be possible as they do not allow enough light to pass through the shell.  

I (Bonnie Tangey) have outlined the basics of egg candling below. It takes
practice to learn how to identify normal features and abnormalities of
developing embryos. If anyone else at Vow is conducting the candling in
future, and would like more information before proceeding, I recommend
watching breeder candling demonstrations on YouTube. It's a simple way to see
different examples of eggs throughout their development.

Why we should candle  
  
In the early stages of embryonic development, candling is performed to check
that eggs are fertile, and have begun to develop an embryo. At this stage, we
can also check for hairline fractures in the egg, which can allow contaminates
to pass through the shell and harm the developing embryo (and potentially
contaminate isolated cell cultures).  

Later, candling is used to check that embryos are progressing through
development, and to identify any eggs that have died part way through
development. Embryos that have died should be removed from the incubator in
order to protect the remaining eggs. Gasses can build up within the shell as
the embryo decomposes, causing it to eventually burst and potentially spread
contamination through the incubator.  

When we should candle  
  
Breeders aiming to hatch their eggs will typically only candle 2x throughout
the entire incubation, as too much handing can dislodge the embryo. The first
candling is done at is at around 1/ 4 to 1/ 3 of the time of the natural
incubation period and then again at around halfway through the incubation
period. This exact number of days this equates to is dependent on species. For
example, the natural incubation period before hatch is 21 days for chickens
and 28 days for ducks.  At 1 /4 incubation, developing embryos with have
visible vascularisation when candling, confirming fertility, and by halfway
through their incubation, the embryo will have grown, appearing as a slowly
moving dark shadow within the egg, often with a much darker spot (which is the
embryos eye).  

For this project, we plan to isolate cells from our embryos when they have
been incubated for 1/3 of the time of their natural incubation period. We will
therefore candle eggs at approximately 1/ 4 incubations, and then again at 1/3
incubation in order to identify and remove any eggs that are either infertile
or cease to develop during incubation. Eggs that have died during incubation
should not be used for isolations, due to the risk that they may have died due
to contamination entering the egg. We do not want to risk contamination of our
cell cultures in this way.

What we are looking for

Hairline cracks. Cracks in the shell may not be visible by eye until the egg
is illuminated. Any cracked eggs should be removed due to the risk of
contaminants entering the egg and embryo.

Image: A damaged egg with hairline fractures running along the shell. Image
taken from https://www.cacklehatchery.com/how-to-candle-eggs-for-hatching-or-
eating/

Position of the air cell. There is a pocket of air in each egg, which the
chick uses to take its first breaths. Ideally, the air cell should sit exactly
at the bottom of the fat bit of the egg. It should get larger though
development, but it should not become detached. Shipped eggs sometimes have a
wonky air cell, that sits slightly off centre and this should not
significantly affect embryonic development. When the air cell is detached
(pocket of air moves around the egg as you gently turn it) however, it means
that it is not sitting in the right position for the bird to access it when it
comes time to hatch. Although our eggs will have the opportunity to hatch, it
is a sign that the egg has not been handled well and is unlikely to develop
properly.

Image: The arrow points to the position of the avian air cell, which in the
correct location at the top of the egg. Image taken from:
https://www.sites.ext.vt.edu/virtualfarm/glossary/poultry/candling.html

Confirmation of fertility

You can first see signs of fertility at around 1/ 4 of the way through the
total incubation period. This is when the 'spider' appears. On the surface of
the yolk there will be a red dot, with vessels branching out from it.

Image: Shows early embryonic 'dot' along with branching vascularisation. Image
take from: https://science.sandiegozoo.org/science-blog/candling-shining-
light-development-avian-egg

Infertility and embryonic death (can be determined > 1/3 incubation)  

Infertile \- If the albumin (egg white) is clear, and the egg yolk is
yellow/orange with no shadows, the egg was never fertile

Image: An infertile egg, with clear albumin and well defined yolk. This egg
was never fertilised. Image taken from: https://www.raising-happy-
chickens.com/hatching-chicken-eggs.html

Embryonic death- Blood ring- If embryos die part way through development, a
blood ring will often form due to decomposing blood vessels. It can appear as
a dark ring around the egg, or as a series of blood clots.

Image: A classic blood ring indicating embryonic death. This image was taken
from: https://blog.mypetchicken.com/2013/03/31/5-reasons-why-egg-candling/

Embryonic death (early)- If the egg has died early in embryonic development,
they entire egg can light up orange, with no clear distinction between the
albumin and the yolk.

Embryonic death (late)- Air cell takes up half the egg, with the other half
being black, where no light can pass through.


