

DoE Full-factorial experiment design in JMP (before replicates)

9 Conditions (n=4) = 36 samples

3 Gluten/Seitan Scaffold variants:

  1. Gluten exposed to dry heat (Gluten DH)
  2. Gluten heat treated in water at 80 degrees for 120m then autoclaved (Gluten HT + Autoclaved)
  3. Gluten autoclave (Gluten Autoclaved)

3 Seeding densities: 0.7M, 1M, 2M cells/scaffold

Note: Gluten and seitan will be used interchangeably.

Samples:

0.7M Glut DH (n=4)  
0.7M Glut 120m (n=4)  
0.7M Glut autoclave (n=4)

1M Glut DH (n=4)  
1M Glut 120m (n=4)  
1M Glut autoclave (n=4)

2M Glut DH (n=4)  
2M Glut 120m (n=4)  
2M Glut autoclave (n=4)

  

Cell requirement:

ACF conditions:  
12 seeded at 0.7M = 8.4M  
12 seeded at 1M = 12M  
12 seeded at 2M = 24M  
= 44.4M total ACF cells needed. + error = ~47M  
  
  
Serum conditions:  
Glut DH (n=4)  
Glut 120m (n=4)  
Glut autoclave (n=4)  
All seeded at 1M per scaffold = 16M total serum cells needed + error = ~19M

= 66M total cells required  
  

  

  

Note: Dry heat treatment did not work, therefore, we replaced the Gluten + DH
with Gluten HT + Autoclaved + EPL. Please see below for the conditions:

  1. Gluten autoclaved 
  2. Gluten heat treated (in 80 degree water for 120 minutes) + autoclaved 
  3. Gluten heat treated + autoclaved + EPL coated 

  

  

24 Well plate:

  

24 Well plate (control - cell free):

  




Experiment timeline:

D -3 Preparation of 10C (ACF) Media

D -3 Preparation of scaffolds:

Condition one: Heat in water at 80 degrees + autoclave

  1. Cut into desirable size for use as scaffold in cell culture 
  2. Place samples into a beaker and seal with aluminium 

Condition two: Autoclave

  1.  ~~Cut into desirable size for use as scaffold in cell culture~~ ~~   ~~Sample was sticky and could not form the right size scaffold. Therefore placed small chunks into the beakers to be cut into size after autoclaving. 
  2. Place samples into a beaker and seal with aluminium 

Condition Three: Dry heat

  1. Cut into desirable size for use as scaffold in cell culture
  2.  Place sample in suitable bag for heat sterilisation 
  3.  Treat samples at 220 degrees dry heat 
  4.  Allow samples to cool before use

D-2 Sterilise scaffolds (refer to method of sterilisation below)

D -1 Prepare plate for seeding

D0 - Seeding in 96wp (see plate map above)

D1 - Move to 48wp + inserts (see plate map above), 100% media feed with
respective medias, calculate seed efficiency (tryple wells and pool replicates
for each condition then count), hoechst stain and image (zaber).

D2 - D0 DIFF 100% E6 Feed

D3 - D1 DIFF 100% E6 Feed

D4 - D2 DIFF 100% E6 Feed

D5 - D3 DIFF 100% E6 Feed

D6 - D4 DIFF 100% E6 Feed

D7 -D5 DIFF 100% E6 Feed

D8 -D6 DIFF 100% E6 Feed

D9 -D7 DIFF 100% E6 Feed

D9 -D7 Fix and DAPI + MyoG + MF20 stain

D10 -D8 Image plates  

  

  

  




Method for sterilization:

  1. Autoclave
  2. UV radiation
  3. Dry heat 
  4. Ethanol sterilization 

  * Can be used in combination for ensured sterility. 
  * The thickness of the material may have an impact on sterility (generally the thicker the material, the less likely the center of the material will be sterile) for this reason it is recommended that samples are cut to size prior to sterilisation (i.e. to fit the size of the well they will be seeded in).
  * Autoclave sterilisation is the most effective sterilisation method against all types of microorganisms and spores. Dry heat requires higher temperatures (>/= 150'C) and longer durations (>/=2 hrs) to be considered effective and can easily be used in combination with UV. Where possible UV and ethanol sterilisation should not be solely relied on as these are the least effective sterilisation methods.

  

1\. Autoclave:

Role: Autoclave sterilization works by using heat to kill microorganisms such
as bacteria and spores. The heat is delivered by pressurized steam.
Pressurization allows the steam to reach the high temperatures that are
required for sterilization

Method:

  1.  Place samples in autoclave bag, glass plate or beaker sealed with aluminium foil
  2.  Place inside autoclave. Follow instructions below to operate autoclave (generally operate on normal cycle 121'C for 30 minutes). Note - if using the normal cycle and glass ware you can increase the temperature above 121'C, if the material can withstand this. Just be sure to return the temperature for the next run, as these temperatures can be damaging to other users samples and re-usable plastic ware.

How to use the autoclave:To open the autoclave step on the foot lever at the
front and push down on the handle then release.Liquid cycle:Place the
temperature probe attached to the wire into a bottle containing water, fill
bottle based on the maximum maximum volume of liquid you are autoclaving (only
once this volume has heated to 121'c will the autoclave reach temperature and
hold temperature for sterilisation). Fix the probe in place using aluminium
foil and autoclave tape so that the probe is under the water level. Make sure
all lids on the bottle are screwed on loosely.Be careful handling the wire
temperature probe, else water can get inside. Inspect regularly for cracks in
the protective sheathing.On a liquid cycle you can not increase the speed of
the steam coming in/out using the up/down buttons on the top left of the
machine, this is to prevent liquid boil over.If there is a liquid boil over
(i.e. gelatin etc overflows and spills into the autoclave) then clean this up
while the autoclave is still warm! Pour warm water into the base of the
autoclave and open the tap at the bottom, wash away until all is clear.Normal
cycle:i.e. for autoclaving empty bottles, re-usable reservoirs, forceps, metal
scissors and spatulas.For this cycle place the wire temperature probe inside
the metal bucket, so that it is out of the way.If using autoclave bags ensure
that these are contained within the metal buckets stacked within the autoclave
and not touching the interior casing.When autoclaving metal items only (NOT
GLASS OR PLASTIC) then you can increase the sterilising temperature (e.g. up
to 135'C) to ensure sterility. Check the temperature of a normal run every
time before you start! If you place glass or plastic in the autoclave when the
temp is set above 121'C then this can result in the glass breaking and the
plastic warping!On a normal run you can control the speed of the steam coming
into the autoclave and venting from the autoclave using the up/down buttons on
the top left of the machine, above the screen. This is so that you can speed
up a cycle.Never try to open the autoclave whilst it is still at
pressure.General maintenance:Before each run make sure the autoclave water
level inside the autoclave is almost touching the bottom of the first metal
bucket (can see the water level through the holes). Top this up regularly,
just using normal tap water, reverse osmosis water (RO) (NOT ultrapure Type 1
from the MilliQ as this corrodes the stainless steel!).Be careful when placing
the round metal stacking baskets/trays into the chamber and avoid pinching or
rubbing the probe wire as wear and tear in this way will result in failure of
probe integrity.Approximately once a month check the temperature probe at the
base of the autoclave (internal, under the bottom bucket/tray). Keep this
clean! If any spills or scum cover the temperature probe the probe may think
it is covered in water when it is not, and end up running dry.Regularly empty
the waste water reservoir underneath the autoclave if this becomes full, this
plastic containing waste water just pulls out, and can be poured
away.Approximately once a month open the tap by the coil at the back of the
autoclave, behind the waste reservoir and drain away.

  

2\. Dry heat

Role: Heat treatment works through denaturing the proteins of an organism.
Most organism are able to survive within a set temperature range, however
outside of this range will result in death of the organism. Many organism are
unable to survive high heat treatement, however there are few, such as
thermophiles and spores, that can withstand high heat.

Method:

  1.  If using a dry heat safe nylon bag then line heating rack with aluminum foil (in case of melting plastic, glass ware is the suggested alternative) 
  2.  Place sample in glass ware (or heat stable nylon bag)
  3.  Place sample inside dry heat oven 
  4.  Set temperature (150'C) at an appropriate duration (e.g. 2 hour, current oven has a max duration of 1hr, so you will have to come back and re-start the oven for a second hour)
  5. Keep an eye on material to ensure that it does not burn (until we have a more reliable oven we recommend including the temperature probe inside the oven with the sample, with the reader outside the oven, if this goes above 150'C by more than 3-5'C then stop oven and re-start process, check the oven every 10-30 mins)
  6. Turn dry heat oven off and carefully remove samples  

Caution:

  * Materials that are thick may require longer heat treatment to ensure the center is completely heated. 
  * Heat treatment can burn and change the material properties 

  

3\. Ethanol

Role: Ethanol functions by denaturing the proteins and dissolving lipids in
the phospholipid cell membrane, resulting in cell death. Thus effective
against most bacteria, fungi and some viruses (innaffective against bacterial
spores). It is most effective at 70% ethanol (with 30% MilliQ). If pure
ethanol is used, it will only coagulate the proteins just beneath the cell
wall and creates a barrier of coagulated proteins which seals and  prevents
ethanol from further penetrating the cell. The organism, whilst inactive at
this stage, can regenerate at favourable conditions. At 70% ethanol,
coagulation of protein still occurs at a slower rate that allows for it to
penetrate throughout the cell.

Method:

  1. Prepare 70% Ethanol solution by diluting in 30% MilliQ water. 
  2. Sterile filter solution to ensure sterility and remove any fine particles 
  3. Submerge scaffold into ethanol and allow to sit overnight in the BSC for solution to evaporate  (Note - the higher the volume the longer this will take to evaporate - smaller pieces and thus volumes suggested)
  4. Wash three times with PBS for five minutes each 
  5. Wash with DMEM/F12 (media may turn a different colour - suggest to wash until pink colour does not change)

Caution

  * Residual ethanol can damage cells 
  * Ethanol may effect or damage the material 
  * Ethanol can change the properties of the material (e.g. pH) 

  

  

4\. UV radiation

Role:  UV sterilization works by destroying nucleic acids and disrupting DNA,
leaving the organism unable to perform vital cellular functions. UV light can
have efficient inactivation of bacteria up to a distance of eight feet on
either side and exposure time of 30 minutes is adequate

Method:

  1. Place glass petri-dish into a autoclave bag and autoclave at 121'C or higher for 30min
  2. In the BSC, transfer samples into a pre-autoclaved glass petri dish (lid open)
  3.  Place sample under the UV lamp in the BSC 
  4.  Seal area (close BSC) to prevent damaging exposure of the user to UV 
  5.  Turn on UV light for 1 hour.
  6.  After time has elapsed, turn UV power off, open the BSC then flip sample (using sterile tweezers) or re-distribute if sterilizing a powder. Close BSC.
  7. Turn UV lamp back on and repeat for another 1 hour on the other side.
  8. Close the glass-petri dish and para-film edges

Caution

  * UV treatment is only effective in sterilising the surface of a material. For materials that are thick, it is likely that the UV has not sterilise the center of the material. 
  * Extra precaution must be applied when using UV, as this can damage human DNA and vision upon exposure 

  


