Aim/Purpose


Background

The mini-tissues stream is performing tissue engineering using cell- and
tissue-based matrices and solid moulds with attachment points to form tissues
using Nuvonis suspension cells. We found in Experiment 1 (Cell Density) that
Nuvonis suspension cells form tissues, but do so much slower than adherent
myoblasts (3-4 days compared to 1 day). This finding was surprising owing to
the fact that Nuvonis cells can adhere to tissue culture plastic rapidly
(within 1 day) in the presence of BSA or FBS. Transition from a fluid
suspension environment to a gel-like tissue environment, such as the
Collagenous matrix that we use, should initiate the "phenotypic switch" that
is needed to allow cells to "adhere" to their environment, through induction
of pathways related to focal adhesion, actin filament formation and
cytoskeletal organisation. However, it appears that this phenotypic switch
doesn't occur as quickly in a gelatinous (or viscous suspension) matrix
environment.

Hypothesis

The phenotypic switch to a semi-adherent phenotype that happens when tissue-
engineering with suspension cells happens slowly. We hypothesise that
increasing the stiffness of the gel matrix will increase the speed of tissue
formation due to the faster initiation of phenotypic switching.

Aim

To increase the stiffness of tissue engineered gel matrices using
nanocellulose fibres of varying types and in various concentrations, then
tracking tissue growth and formation each day.

  


Methods and Experiment Layout


Brief Method

The method followed here will be very similar to the one used for the Buffalo
Wings prototype large scale harvest. Briefly, this method will use Nuvonis
cells, embedded in a tissue gel matrix consisting of defined ratios of:
Nanocellulose Fibres, Collagen I, 10x DMEM/F12, 0.1M Sodium Hydroxide. This
allows the formation of tissues via the process of tissue gelation,
condensation and self-assembly around 2 attachment points (Figure 1) - See
Notion page for summary of approach.

  

Figure 1. Myoblast tissues self assembled around 2 attachment points of a 3D
printed solid mould (white)

  

Experiment Layout

We will seed 2 plates containing tissue engineering moulds with 12 tissues
each, at a single cell density of 15M/mL. We will add different types and
concentrations of Nanocellulose fibres to increase the stiffness of the
matrix.

Figure 2. Four types of Nanocellulose fibres to trial, all in water ready to
be autoclaved (from Left to Right): (A) Cellulose Nanofibril slurry (Cellulose
Labs), (B) Cellulose Nanofibrils prepared by high-pressure (Cellulose Labs),
(C) Cellulose Nanofibrils prepared by supermass colloider (Cellulose Labs) and
(D) Bacterial Nanocellulose "fleece" (Cass Materials)

  

Plate 1: We will vary the type of Nanocellulose fibres (4 shown above - Fig 2)
at a single percentage (0.5% v/v)

Figure 3. Tissue eng mould plate layout for plate 1, experiment 6 -
Nanocellulose types

  

Plate 2: We will trial three percentages (0.25, 0.75, 1.5%) of 2 types of
Nanocellulose fibres - Nanocellulose slurry (Fig 2A) and High-pressure
Cellulose Nanofibrils (Fig 2B)

Figure 4. Tissue eng mould plate layout for plate 2, experiment 6 -
Nanocellulose concentration




Before Starting

  * Calculate approximate cell requirements for experiment 6 - plates 1 and 2
    * = Approx 1.44 Billion cells for 2 plates at 15M cells per mL
  * Calculate required cell densities and volumes of matrix ingredients for large can be found here: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1nAKlh6US6Xud95YGlDTkI4LHBWjzlAxnhmTym1P2bUw/edit#gid=66228982
    * Total volumes for experiment:
      * Collagen I = 39ml
      * 10x DMEM/F12 = 4.7ml
      * 0.1M NaOH = 6ml
  * Place Large dishes into 80% Ethanol bath
  * Autoclave Nanocellulose types
  * Make up min. 120mL 0.25% Pluronic
  * Ensure matrix reagents are made up fresh at required concentrations

Matrix reagents details for this experiment:

  * Make up matrix reagents:
    * Collagen I to 2.6mg/mL - stock is at 6.17mg/mL - dilution factor 1:2.4
      * need ~ 39 mL total (make ~42 mL)


