

Adaptation of fibroblasts to suspension culture is critical if we want to
achieve hand off of this product to production by the end of Q3.

Vow aims to feed billions of people. To achieve this scale, we need to be
growing cells in suspension in a large bioreactor. Thus, we need to achieve
suspension culture of fibroblasts as soon as possible.

Fibroblasts were not successfully adapted to suspension in this trial.

12.6 million fibroblasts placed into an E125 shaker flask in
DMEM/F12+20%FBS+1xPS declined in number and viability rapidly. By Day 5 post-
suspension adaption, there were approximately 500k cells left in suspension
and by Day 7, over 90% of those remaining cells were dead. We continued to
feed these suspension cultures for an additional two weeks in hopes that a
small number of cells might adapt to suspension and begin proliferating,
however by day 22 it was clear that no viable cells remained in the suspension
culture. Thus, the suspension culture was discarded. There are several factors
that may be responsible for preventing these cells from adapting to
suspension, and further research into these areas may allow us to succeed in
adapting fibroblasts to suspension

The media may not be optimised for suspension culture

There are a number of specific medias that are supposedly optimised for
suspension culture. These include HyClone CDM4Avian, HyClone HEC293, HyClone
ActiPro, and HyClone CHO cells. We will order some of these basal medias which
have more concentrated micro and macronutrients to support growth of cells at
a higher density in suspension. These medias also may include ingredients that
specifically support suspension culture of cells.

Including other components to the media may also allow us to achieve
suspension. RGD and YIGSR peptides are commercially available and bind
fibroblast integrins. Fibroblast integrins typically bind other fribroblasts
or the bottom of a plastic flask or plate in adherent culture. Thus, binding
these intergrins may induce signalling that compels fibroblast to proliferate
in suspension as if they were bound to a plastic culture plate.

ROCK inhibitor and anti-clumping agents have also been used successfully
encourage adaptation of fibroblasts to suspension. We should try incorporating
these agents into our media.

In addition, serum contains a variety of proteins that facilitate cell
adherence. Perhaps reducing the amount of serum in our media will encourage
adaptation of fibroblasts to suspension. Inclusion of components like knock-
out serum replacement or growth factors like IGF, PDGR, or FGF may encourage
proliferation of fibroblasts even in the absence of serum.

The filter system may be eliminating viable fibroblasts

Although using a filter system has been proposed in the past to encourage
breakup of clumps and growth of fibroblasts in single cell suspension, this
filter system may also be binding fibroblasts and removing viable cells from
the suspension. Thus, it may be advantageous to skip the filter. This will
also allow us to process a larger number of suspension cultures more quickly.
Other labs have successfully skipped the filter system in the past, during
adaptation of fibroblasts to suspension culture.

  

The use of E125 flasks means that we can not look at a huge number of
different fibroblast suspension conditions in tandem.

We will begin working with 50mL tubes in place of E125 flasks to facilitate
increased numbers of samples that we can run in tandem. We will also try to
set up a system of Hoest & Pi staining to be able to quantify and obtain
viability percentages for a large number of fibroblast suspension culture con-
currently.

  

Proposed next steps for subsequent trials of suspension culture adaptation

5 x conditions: Hyclone suspension medias + 10% FBS + RGD & YIGSR peptides +
1:100 anti-clumping agent + ROCKi

5 x conditions: These medias + Knockout serum replacement + RGD & YIGSR
peptides \+ 1:100 anti-clumping agent + ROCKi

5 x conditions: These medias + 100ng/mL FGF, IGF1, PDGF + RGD & YIGSR peptides
\+ 1:100 anti-clumping agent + ROCKi (ACF edition)

  

  

In addition, we should try to adapt fibroblasts to suspension from an earlier
stage, i.e. directly after fibroblasts are isolated from a biopsy or from a
nearly-raw isolate stage. We have a new biopsy coming in the first week of
July that we can test this with. We can also test it with chicken fibroblasts
that were just barely isolated before being frozen down. The fibroblasts used
in this experiment have been grown with 20% FBS for ~10 passages and thus may
be adapted to prefer adherent culture and large amounts of serum more than
cells frozen down at a very early passage.

  


