Intro to ELN at Vow

Welcome to the home of all things science! Here is where you will record all
of your data that will help us change the way the world eats. But before you
dive into your first experiment, let's back up just a little.

Why is a lab book important? The number one most important reason for keeping
an accurate (and up to date) lab book is to keep track of your data; what you
did, why you did it, how you did it and what you found. Without keeping an
accurate record, it becomes impossible for you to accurately reproduce your
findings and to even understand what it was that you found in the first place.
There are also important legal reasons for keeping an accurate record of your
work, but that first point is the most important. You can read more about the
importance of a lab book in this article from Science magazine

What should I put into my lab book? In short, everything! You should think of
your lab book as your diary, but instead of writing about your hopes and
dreams, write about your idea's, your interesting anecdotal observations, your
experimental plans, your experimental data and any analyses you perform. All
of this information needs to be written in sufficient detail so that if
someone else wanted to repeat your experiment they could do so by just reading
your lab book. In addition, we have set these notebooks up so you can also
include records (emails and written summaries) of any communications you have
with external companies, we also have have a location to store (and
collaborate on) any presentation you may be working on. SOP's? we have a place
for them here as well! And if there is something else you want to store, then
we can create a spot for that as well. Basically, LabArchives should become
the home for everything you do here at Vow.

Milestones, Epics and Stories (..oh my)

Before the start of each quarter we (as a science team) spend some time
planning for the most critical questions for us to answer over the next
quarter. These questions are then framed as large audacious goals for the
quarter. Given that three months is a long time and a lot can happen
(especially at Vow!), we try to break those big goals down into more
manageable pieces, we call these milestones. By tracking our progress against
our monthly milestones, we can get a pretty good idea as to how likely we are
to achieve any specific goal. Hitting the milestones doesn't guarantee
success, but it does help us understand whether we are on track. Finally, each
milestone is made up of a series of experiments. Here at Vow we call these
experiments Epics. Each epic should be designed in a manner that brings us
closer to hitting our monthly milestones OR our quarterly goals. Here is a
visual picture of what this looks like:  

One final point is that we like to track workload at Vow using Clubhouse. We
do this so that you can better estimate how much work you can and can't do, in
a perfect world this should allow you to call out for help in advance of a
very busy day (even better, reduce the number of unplanned long days). To
track individual workload, we break each epic into much smaller pieces (in an
experiment, think of this as a step that you perform in a day eg. passaging
cells) which are called stories. To each story we assign an estimate of how
long that task is going to take using a Fibonacci sequence of score (1, 2, 3,
5, 8 etc) and round up. For example, a passage of one T75 flask may only take
you 15mins and so would get a score of 1 while a passage of 30 T75 flasks
might take you four hours and so would get a score of 5.  

Starting a new EPIC

Quarterly goals and monthly milestones will be set at our strategy sessions,
and then from this point on you are ready to start your first Epic. Here at
Vow we have designated roles for each step, including: (i) experimental
design, (ii) labwork, (iii) data analysis and (iv) interpretation of results.
As you become more and more comfortable and experienced with experiments at
Vow, you will be expected to play a larger role in each one of these steps.
But rest assured that you will be given guidance the whole way through!

Step 1. Decide upon a name for your Epic.

Step 2. Log in to clubhouse and create a new Epic and assign it to the correct
Milestone (take note of the EPIC ID number in the top right hand corner).

Step 3. Log in to Lab Archives and create a new EPIC page under the relevant
Project folder.

Step 4. Copy the "EPICXXXXX" template (click here) to the top of your EPIC
page in Lab Archives and fill out the details for your link to the clubhouse
epic, your aims and your hypotheses.  

Step 5. You are ready to go!

Completing your EPIC

So, you have finished your experimental work, you know what your results look
like and you are just itching to start your next EPIC. However, before moving
on to the next EPIC it is important that you take the time to think about your
results: Did you prove/disprove your hypothesis? Did you make any surprising
observations along the way? What were the limitations to your EPIC and how
might these have impacted your results? What were the biggest learnings from
this EPIC? and, what were the key takeaways? All of these questions (and many
more) should be answered in your EPIC report. Without completing (and sharing)
your report the EPIC remains incomplete. In many ways the report is the most
important part of your entire EPIC!

While it is hard to be prescriptive with what a report should contain, there
are a few common points that all reports should consider. A report should
(almost) replicate the "Discussion" section of a journal article. The
following is a ROUGH guide with a suggested paragraph structure. PLEASE ensure
to include references to previously published work (or links to work conducted
here at Vow).

  1. What is the most important overarching finding? 
  2. A brief discussion of all results and how they fit into our final goal of producing an edible meat product (this section might be several paragraphs long and should put the results into the context of what has been done before). 
  3. Any limitations of the study, why might our results not be correct? 
  4. What is the overall conclusion? 
  5. Discussion of future directions.

After completing the report be sure to update the Header Info page.  
  
Once finalised send your report to be reviewed.

***PLEASE NOTE, YOUR REPORT SHOULD BE FINALISED WITHIN TWO WEEKS OF COMPLETING
ALL EXPERIMENTAL WORK.***  


