Written by:      Shaleen Sharma    Date submitted for review:  XXXXXX
Reviewed by: XXXX XXXXXX  Date: XXXXXXXX
Aim:


AIM/PURPOSE: To screen cheaper and more available alternatives to Ficoll PM 70
for the purposes macro molecular crowding.  


Hypothesis:


HYPOTHESIS: At least one alternative crowder will produce 70% of the effect of
Ficoll PM 70 in our Nuvonis fibroblast cell line.


Background


  

Y/N

    Links

Justification  
  
Is this a continuation of a previous experiment/series of work?

Yes

https://au-
mynotebook.labarchives.com/share/Vow%2520-%2520R&D/MTE1NzMuOXwxMDYzMTcvODkwMy9UcmVlTm9kZS8zNzgwMTk0MjY5fDI5Mzc5Ljg5OTk5OTk5OTk5OA==

The last body of work in these DSD experiments identified a maximum
concentration of Ficoll PM 70 that produces the thickest cell sheets that we
have seen from MMC yet. However, Ficoll PM 70 is costly, scarce and we require
a large amount at this identified concentration. Hence, a clear need arises to
screen a cheaper and more available alternatives to Ficoll that produces a
similar effect.  
  
Is the experiment based on findings from literature research?

No

  

N/A  
  
  
  

Variable* (include full names not just abbreviations)

 Description (e.g. what concentrations are being tested)

Justification

 Relevant links (e.g. to literature and/or product pages)  
Inulin  
  
  
  
Dextrin  
  
  
  
Starch  
  
  
  
Amylopectin  
  
  
  
Guar gum  
  
  
  
Gum arabic  
  
  
  
Iota Carrageenan  
  
  
  
Kappa Carrageenan  
  
  
  
Lambda Carrageenan  
  
  
  
Dextran  
  
  
  
Ficoll PM 70  
  
  
  
  
*factor that is to be manipulated, controlled for, or measured in an experiment e.g. media additive or seeding density  
  
Why? Including a background section provides justification for why certain
research choices were made and prompts you to ensure that this is an
appropriate research direction i.e. one which will likely assist us in
reaching our goals. This is important to the reader/reviewer as well as to
project leads and ultimately investors, ensuring that our time, money and
energy is being put to good use.


Methods


Concisely and clearly describe the experiment design, ensure that the
following information has been included:  
  
What combination of factors are being tested? (if relevant use a table to
demonstrate this)  
  

Replicate number

Cell type/s

Experiment

duration

Timepoints

Total number of cells needed

Number and type of vessels required**

Controls

Base media

Method/s of measurement

Quantitative or qualitative***  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
*See the following page on statistics, specifically the power calculations section to determine appropriate number of replicates  
*number does not include vessels required for cell expansion prior to testing variables  
**will the results retrieved be quantitative (data that can be
counted/measured using numbers and can be used to calculate significance) or
qualitative (cannot be counted/measured/expressed easily using numbers,
results are more observational and open to interpretation)  
  
Why? The tabulated information above represents the critical information
required to repeat the experiment and interpret the findings. Thus, it is
important that it is documented clearly for reproducibility purposes. Note -
it is preferred that experiments generate quantitative data with enough
replicates to calculate significance, if the experiment only results in
qualitative findings please take time to reassess the experimental plan, can a
quantitative method be used? will qualitative findings be sufficient to decide
whether the outcomes are successful or not? how can you limit bias and error
in recording these findings?  
  


Plate map (or other relevant diagram):



Timeline


Daily breakdown of tasks in table form.

Day

Task  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Why? Clear and easy to follow thus minimising chance of error


