

Consulted with Bonnie as to how to best introduce the CHOMP cells into
suspension. Wild type cells have performed the best in our past suspension
adaptation efforts after our nucleofection experiments. Here the cells were
placed into 50mL tubes and shaken at 120rpm which wasn't enough to keep them
suspended but was enough to keep them alive.

Our media we're going to use consists of Nuvonis suspension media with 10% FBS
serum.

I've decided to include the serum in the suspension media for the moment to
reduce the stress associated with the change to a suspension environment. I
believe we may have over stressed our cells initially in our nucleofection
experiments by removing serum from their media during their adaptation to
suspension. This method of adaptation has been seen in literature in the
following paper https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26854539/).

In this experiment I will emulate similar processes that are being used for
the Big bang embryonic suspension experiment.

  1. Cells will be seeded from adherent planar culture (DMEM/F12 + 10% FBS + 1xP/S) into suspension culture (Nuvonis suspension media + 10% FBS + 0.01ug/mL EGF, 0.01ug/mL FGF2b and 0.05ug/mL IGF1-LR3. 
  2. Density used for seeding will be 1 million cells per mL, seeded into 50mL bioreactor tubes containing 10mL of the suspension media. The number of tubes used will depend on the number of cells harvested. 
  3. A few cell pellets from the lifted adherent cells (containing >1million cells) will be washed in dPBS then frozen down for future RNA extraction if the cells prove successful in their suspension adaptation. 
  4. The suspensions will shake at 190rpm at 30 degrees, 5% CO2 to induce suspension adaptation. 
  5. The suspensions will receive a 90% feed on Day 1 post seed then receive a 90% Feed every 48 hours after that. Cells will be centrifuged at 300g for 5 minutes to pellet single cells while leaving debris free floating for removal. 
  6. Suspensions will be counted 24 after seeding using a trypan blue staining procedure then every 48 hours after that. 


