Written by: Victoria Prior    Date submitted for review:  XXXXXX
Reviewed by: XXXX XXXXXX  Date: XXXXXXXX
Aim:


to quantify metabolites glucose, L-glutamine, ammonia, and lactate in spent
media using absorbance-based commercial kits. We will measure Nuvonis cell
culture metabolite profiles over time from initial seeding to
stationary/death-phase, and compare how these profiles differ between
different medium formulations.  


Hypothesis:


we propose that metabolite profiles will differ between mediums where:

  1. 1) some metabolites will be consumed and thus depleted in spent media, and 
  2. 2) some metabolites will accumulate as a waste byproduct and thus increase in spent media

From these data, we aim to:

  1. 1) resolve favourable metabolite profiles in positive controls
  2. 2) resolve metabolite profiles for our current in-house media formulation
  3. 3) determine how to modulate our current in-house media formulation to generate a favourable metabolite profile by adjusting metabolites in either media starting formulation or through scheduled feeding


Background
  
Y/N     LinksJustification  
Is this a continuation of a previous experiment/series of work?  YLab book
entry hereMedia samples used in this experiment have been generated in
EPIC31448  
Is the experiment based on findings from literature research? Y-HyCell is
verified as a gold standard positive control, and suitable medium to achieve
our objective 30g/L in batch mode. We expect that by altering availability or
concentration of key metabolites in our in-house media formulation to match
this control profile, we will increase the capacity of our media to support
high cell densities.  
  
  
  

Variable

 Metabolites measured

Justification

 Relevant links (e.g. to literature and/or product pages)  
HyCell Nuvonis media

  * Ammonia 
  * Lactate
  * Glucose
  * L-glutamine/L-glutamate

Positive control - gold standard for favourable metabolite profile-  
Freestyle Nuvonis mediaPositive control-  
100% CHO Nuvonis mediaVariable control-  
MFG CHO mediaExperimental condition-  
R&D CHO mediaExperimental condition  
-  
  
See attached for absorbance-based kit product information sheets


Methods


Concisely and clearly describe the experiment design, ensure that the
following information has been included:  
  
What combination of factors are being tested? (if relevant use a table to
demonstrate this)  
  

Replicate number

Cell type/s

Experiment

duration

Timepoints

Total number of cells needed

Number and type of vessels required**

Controls

Base media

Method/s of measurement

Quantitative or qualitative***  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  

*See the following page on statistics, specifically the power calculations section to determine appropriate number of replicates  
*number does not include vessels required for cell expansion prior to testing variables  
**will the results retrieved be quantitative (data that can be
counted/measured using numbers and can be used to calculate significance) or
qualitative (cannot be counted/measured/expressed easily using numbers,
results are more observational and open to interpretation)  
  


Plate map (or other relevant diagram):


G-sheet


Timeline


Daily breakdown of tasks in table form.

Day

Task  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Why? Clear and easy to follow thus minimising chance of error


