Written by: Lily 25-August-2022 submitted for review: 25-August-2022


Why? Accountability and so the reader/reviewer knows who to address in follow
up comments and questions.


Reviewed by: Victoria Prior  Date: 25-August-2022


Why? It is important that the experimental plan is reviewed prior to
experiment start, this is because a reviewer may be able to pick up on key
errors or oversights. An example of such an oversight would be an experiment
that has been planned without sufficient replicates or controls to determine
if an outcome is significant. Or perhaps the reviewer will be able to simplify
the experiment, by reducing cell demand and/or experiment duration, which
would help us to reach our goals in a more efficient manner.


Aim: to determine whether seeding densities of ≥ 500k/mL will lead to maximum cell densities of ≥3M cells/mL in our current growth medium


Copy from Header Info page.


Hypothesis: that seeding densities of ≥ 500k/mL will allow for a maximum density of ≥3M cells/mL


Copy from Header Info page.


Background
  
Y/N     LinksJustification  
Is this a continuation of a previous experiment/series of work?  YLink to
previous seeding density experiment  
We observed a positive trend between seeding densities and final maximum
densities in a past experiment (linked), however the difference in maximum
densities was not significant. We have come back to investigate whether a more
aggressive increase in seeding densities may lead to a significant difference
in maximum densities. We hypothesise that there are some crucial media
ingredients either being used up or degraded in the medium by days 5-6 without
feeds, given our cells consistently enter the death phase after this time-
point. By seeding higher and achieving a steeper growth curve in the first 5
days, we will hopefully allow the cells to reach a higher maximum density
before the death phase begins.  
Is the experiment based on findings from literature research?  
  
Why do we think that this is worth investigation. What is the knowledge gap?  
  
  
  

Variable* (include full names not just abbreviations)

 Description (e.g. what concentrations are being tested)

Justification

 Relevant links (e.g. to literature and/or product pages)  
Seeding density 200K, 500K, 1M, 2M cells/mLExplained in table aboveSee link in
table above  
  
  
  
  
  
  
*factor that is to be manipulated, controlled for, or measured in an experiment e.g. media additive or seeding density  
  
Why? Including a background section provides justification for why certain
research choices were made and prompts you to ensure that this is an
appropriate research direction i.e. one which will likely assist us in
reaching our goals. This is important to the reader/reviewer as well as to
project leads and ultimately investors, ensuring that our time, money and
energy is being put to good use.  




Reviewer comments [VP]

  * my OCD tendencies want to make 1:2 dilutions from 2M cells/mL to 250k/mL but understand that 200k is the control as our now standard practise. Recommend making the 1:2 dilutions anyway for the seeding (bar 200k/mL condition). Could prepare dilutions so that the same volume is added per flask 
  * [LL] I've changed the plan slightly to do dilutions from the same cell stock 


Methods


Concisely and clearly describe the experiment design, ensure that the
following information has been included:  
  
What combination of factors are being tested? (if relevant use a table to
demonstrate this)  
  

Replicate number

Cell type/s

Experiment

duration

Timepoints

Total number of cells needed

Number and type of vessels required**

Controls

Base media

Method/s of measurement

Quantitative or qualitative***  
  
3Nuvonis suspension6-7 daysDays 1,2,3,4,5,6,7315M (note that this does not
include the cell requirement to seed the control flasks, as we are sharing a
control with experiment 828)9 x E125s (not including control flasks)E125s
seeded at 200K cells/mL (seeded with experiment 828)R&D 50:50 CHO/RPMI Nuvonis
suspension mediumCell countsQuantitative  
  
*See the following page on statistics, specifically the power calculations section to determine appropriate number of replicates  
*number does not include vessels required for cell expansion prior to testing variables  
**will the results retrieved be quantitative (data that can be
counted/measured using numbers and can be used to calculate significance) or
qualitative (cannot be counted/measured/expressed easily using numbers,
results are more observational and open to interpretation)  
  
Why? The tabulated information above represents the critical information
required to repeat the experiment and interpret the findings. Thus, it is
important that it is documented clearly for reproducibility purposes. Note -
it is preferred that experiments generate quantitative data with enough
replicates to calculate significance, if the experiment only results in
qualitative findings please take time to reassess the experimental plan, can a
quantitative method be used? will qualitative findings be sufficient to decide
whether the outcomes are successful or not? how can you limit bias and error
in recording these findings?  
  


Plate map (or other relevant diagram): N/A


Why? Clear and easy to follow thus minimising chance of error


Timeline


Daily breakdown of tasks in table form.

Day

Date

Task

Reviewer comments  
  
025-Aug-2022

  1. Prepare 280 mL x R&D 50:50 RPMI:CHO Nuvonis suspension medium with growth factors 
  2. Perform cell count on continuous culture vessel being used for seeding (taking cells from MFG)
  3. Transfer aliquot of MFG cell suspension containing 320M cells
  4. Centrifuge for 5 min at 500 x g 
  5. Aspirate supernatant 
  6. Re-suspend in 160 mL of growth medium (2M cells/mL)
  7. Transfer 30 mL of cell suspension to each of 3 x E125s
    1. Leave as is (2M cells/mL) 
  8. Transfer 15 mL of cell suspension to each of 3 x E125s
    1. Add 15 mL of growth medium to each E125 (1M cells/mL)
  9. Transfer 7.5 mL of cell suspension to each of 3 x E125s
    1. Add 13.5 mL of growth medium to each E125 (0.5M cells/mL)
  10. Incubate E125s at 37'C, 120 RPM

  
  
126-Aug-2022  
Perform cell counts on all cultures using Cellaca  
  
227-Aug-2022  
Perform cell counts on all cultures using Cellaca  
  
  
328-Aug-2022  
Perform cell counts on all cultures using Cellaca  
  
  
429-Aug-2022  
Perform cell counts on all cultures using Cellaca  
  
  
530-Aug-2022  
Perform cell counts on all cultures using Cellaca  
  
  
631-Aug-2022  
Perform cell counts on all cultures using Cellaca & discard cultures  
  
  
  
Why? Clear and easy to follow thus minimising chance of error


