Written by:     Jesi Domingo    Date submitted for review:  XXXXXX


Why? Accountability and so the reader/reviewer knows who to address in follow
up comments and questions.


Reviewed by: XXXX XXXXXX  Date: XXXXXXXX


Why? It is important that the experimental plan is reviewed prior to
experiment start, this is because a reviewer may be able to pick up on key
errors or oversights. An example of such an oversight would be an experiment
that has been planned without sufficient replicates or controls to determine
if an outcome is significant. Or perhaps the reviewer will be able to simplify
the experiment, by reducing cell demand and/or experiment duration, which
would help us to reach our goals in a more efficient manner.


Aim:


Copy from Header Info page.


Hypothesis:


Copy from Header Info page.


Background
  
Y/N     LinksJustification  
Is this a continuation of a previous experiment/series of work?  
Why is this being continued i.e. what did we find out before and what are we
hoping to find out now, what is being changed in this experiment?  
Is the experiment based on findings from literature research?  
  
Why do we think that this is worth investigation. What is the knowledge gap?  
  
  
  

Variable* (include full names not just abbreviations)

 Description (e.g. what concentrations are being tested)

Justification

 Relevant links (e.g. to literature and/or product pages)  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
*factor that is to be manipulated, controlled for, or measured in an experiment e.g. media additive or seeding density  
  
Why? Including a background section provides justification for why certain
research choices were made and prompts you to ensure that this is an
appropriate research direction i.e. one which will likely assist us in
reaching our goals. This is important to the reader/reviewer as well as to
project leads and ultimately investors, ensuring that our time, money and
energy is being put to good use.


Methods


Concisely and clearly describe the experiment design, ensure that the
following information has been included:  
  
What combination of factors are being tested? (if relevant use a table to
demonstrate this)  
  

Replicate number

Cell type/s

Experiment

duration

Timepoints

Total number of cells needed

Number and type of vessels required**

Controls

Base media

Method/s of measurement

Quantitative or qualitative***  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
*See the following page on statistics, specifically the power calculations section to determine appropriate number of replicates  
*number does not include vessels required for cell expansion prior to testing variables  
**will the results retrieved be quantitative (data that can be
counted/measured using numbers and can be used to calculate significance) or
qualitative (cannot be counted/measured/expressed easily using numbers,
results are more observational and open to interpretation)  
  
Why? The tabulated information above represents the critical information
required to repeat the experiment and interpret the findings. Thus, it is
important that it is documented clearly for reproducibility purposes. Note -
it is preferred that experiments generate quantitative data with enough
replicates to calculate significance, if the experiment only results in
qualitative findings please take time to reassess the experimental plan, can a
quantitative method be used? will qualitative findings be sufficient to decide
whether the outcomes are successful or not? how can you limit bias and error
in recording these findings?  
  


Plate map (or other relevant diagram):


Why? Clear and easy to follow thus minimising chance of error


Timeline


Daily breakdown of tasks in table form.

Day

Task  
  
29 Aug 22 Seeding 3x boxes  
30 Aug 22Monitor  
31 Aug 22100% feed 3x boxes  
  
02 Sep 22100% feed 3x boxes  
  
04 Sep 22100% feed 3x boxes  
  
06 Sep 22Harvest  
  
  
Why? Clear and easy to follow thus minimising chance of error


