Written by:      Shaleen Sharma    Date submitted for review:


Why? Accountability and so the reader/reviewer knows who to address in follow
up comments and questions.


Reviewed by: XXXX XXXXXX  Date: XXXXXXXX
Aim:


To assess the impact of reduced alginate and higher cell content in MMC noodle
format on texture and taste.


Hypothesis:


Copy from Header Info page.


Background
  
Y/N     LinksJustification  
Is this a continuation of a previous experiment/series of work?  YNuvonis
noodlesAs they currently exist, the Nuvonis noodles format consists of 50%
alginate. It is highly desirable for our current and future products to
consist of a high percentage of cells (e.g. 90%) after post processing methods
as chefs prefer having a raw product to manipulate in their dishes. Hence, the
aim of this experiment is to reduce the alginate:cells ratio to as little as
possible without compromising structural integrity of the noodle format.  
Is the experiment based on findings from literature research?N  
  
  
  
  
  

Variable* (include full names not just abbreviations)

 Description (e.g. what concentrations are being tested)

Justification

 Relevant links (e.g. to literature and/or product pages)  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
*factor that is to be manipulated, controlled for, or measured in an experiment e.g. media additive or seeding density  
  
Why? Including a background section provides justification for why certain
research choices were made and prompts you to ensure that this is an
appropriate research direction i.e. one which will likely assist us in
reaching our goals. This is important to the reader/reviewer as well as to
project leads and ultimately investors, ensuring that our time, money and
energy is being put to good use.


Methods


Concisely and clearly describe the experiment design, ensure that the
following information has been included:  
  
What combination of factors are being tested? (if relevant use a table to
demonstrate this)  
  

Replicate number

Cell type/s

Experiment

duration

Timepoints

Total number of cells needed

Number and type of vessels required**

Controls

Base media

Method/s of measurement

Quantitative or qualitative***  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
*See the following page on statistics, specifically the power calculations section to determine appropriate number of replicates  
*number does not include vessels required for cell expansion prior to testing variables  
**will the results retrieved be quantitative (data that can be
counted/measured using numbers and can be used to calculate significance) or
qualitative (cannot be counted/measured/expressed easily using numbers,
results are more observational and open to interpretation)  
  
Why? The tabulated information above represents the critical information
required to repeat the experiment and interpret the findings. Thus, it is
important that it is documented clearly for reproducibility purposes. Note -
it is preferred that experiments generate quantitative data with enough
replicates to calculate significance, if the experiment only results in
qualitative findings please take time to reassess the experimental plan, can a
quantitative method be used? will qualitative findings be sufficient to decide
whether the outcomes are successful or not? how can you limit bias and error
in recording these findings?  
  


Plate map (or other relevant diagram):


Why? Clear and easy to follow thus minimising chance of error


Timeline


Daily breakdown of tasks in table form.

Day

Task  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Why? Clear and easy to follow thus minimising chance of error


