

## Completed by:




See raw results and data analysis here:
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1673_rqP6wqQKeMa98CfECZoynUyZxwJh2sJLsY4SUT4/edit?ts=60d51399#gid=1753166603

Implementing gelatin as a factor to improve maturation:

Strangely, the findings of this study do NOT correlate with the work completed
by Lui and co-workers [1]. For example, the team suggest a bi-phasic effect
with increasing gelatin concentrations where the optimal effect is seen at 5
mg/mL and a detrimental effect is seen at 20 mg/ml of gelatin (when used as a
coating and also when 20uL is injected into damaged muscle tissue). As
evidenced by Figure 1, supplementing differentiation media with gelatin
provides no favourable effect on maturation, but rather suggests that any
addition of gelatin in E6 results in a decrease in the maturation process
(suggested by steadily declining MF20 signal). Furthermore, it appears that
coating cell culture treated plasticware with increasing concentrations of
gelatin proves to have no benefit over control in C2C12 cells (see Figure 2).
The underlying reason behind this phenomenon remains unclear, however several
differences between this study and the work done by Lui and co-workers bring
light to several possibilities. The most significant difference is that the
study was conducted in the context of muscle regeneration. While the
principles of myogenesis should remain similar in maturation between cell
culture (done in this study) and muscle regeneration (done by Lui and co-
workers), the difference in these two conditions may be the reason why the
same effect isn't seen. For example, during the muscle regeneration process
the extracellular matrix (ECM) is re-modeled where collagen is broken down and
gelatin is produced [1]. If this effect occurs in ADDITION to the
supplementation/coatings implemented by the team then the total amount of
gelatin C2C12s are exposed to in the study is more than the concentrations
used (1, 5, 10, 20 mg/mL). It is possible that the optimal effect at 5 mg/mL
seen is purely in regenerative conditions. While it is unlikely, this could
possibly explain the unexpected increase in MF20 signal in Figure 2 at 20
mg/mL and any further increases in concentration could possibly reproduce the
same trend observed by Lui and co-workers. However, this would require further
testing and repeats to make a conclusive finding.

  
Optimising and developing the ELISA pipeline at Vow:

This study features the second iteration of the ELISA workflow at Vow. The aim
for this iteration was to improve on the shortcomings of the initial assay and
produced a more optimised pipeline in a step towards reliably measuring
maturation in our primary myoblasts. One significant issue with the first
iteration was that a non-specific binding effect was observed in the
absorbance readings, where the underlying reason was likely due to extended
incubation with the HRP-conjugated secondary antibody and insufficient washing
protocol between addition of reagents. This was addressed in the experimental
protocol for this assay where the incubation time with the secondary HRP (and
fluorescent) antibody was restricted to one hour. As a result, the unusually
high absorbance readings observed in the first iteration were mitigated in
this iteration. As seen in Tables 1 and 2 (and the raw absorbance values shown
here:
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1673_rqP6wqQKeMa98CfECZoynUyZxwJh2sJLsY4SUT4/edit?ts=60d51399#gid=1753166603)
the absorbance values seen in this iteration are much lower. This is a
significant improvement over the much higher values seen beforehand where most
well produced similar absorbance at 450nm despite varying cell densities and
conditions. Hence, going forward an incubation time of 1 hour will be enforced
with the HRP-conjugated secondary antibody. Furthermore, centrifuging of each
96 well plate before absorbance reading was also implemented into this
workflow and will remain in future iterations.  
  
Despite this improvement, this iteration outlined several more areas to
improve on. Manual washing steps during the Janus Green stain are both tedious
and also give rise to irregular readings as a result of sample loss. During
washing steps, it was observed that stained cells would lift off the bottom of
wells during washing, leading to low readings at 650nm. This can be seen in
Table 2 where this was especially observed in the 20 mg/mL columns and in the
raw Janus Green absorbance values (see linked spreadsheet above).  
  
Interestingly, the ELISA absorbance for all conditions depicted very low MyoG
signals (see Tables 1 and 2) in comparison to corresponding MF20 signals (see
Figures 3 and 4). While lower MyoG signal is expected and is also seen in
fluorescent controls (Figures 6 and 7), the vast difference observed in the
ELISA absorbance is not consistent with this. This effect is not seen in the
first iteration, where MyoG readings are lower however not similar to blank
readings as observed in this case. It is possible that these low readings are
resultant from errors within the antibody staining process, however repeats of
this staining process are required to make a definitive judgement.  
  


