

Meeting agenda:

  * To review progress based on the last meeting

(see meeting notes here https://au-
mynotebook.labarchives.com/share/Vow%2520-%2520Team%2520Science/NTQwLjgwMDAwMDAw[…]A2MzE3LzQxNi0xNjk0L1RyZWVOb2RlLzEzOTQzNDMzfDEzNzIuOA==
)

  * To discuss previously raised blockers described here: https://au-mynotebook.labarchives.com/share/Vow%2520-%2520Team%2520Science/MjYwLjB8MTA2MzE3LzIwMC00MjQvVHJlZU5vZGUvMzI0MjM4MzkzfDY2MC4w
  * To discuss if there are any new or current blockers in getting the micro carrier pipeline up and running i.e. what work has been de-prioritised, what are the next steps? and are we on track for having a functional high-throughput pipeline by Q3?

  
  
Meeting participants:  
Tom, Nathan, Derek, Stanley, Chris, Ella, Avani, Bec, Marie  
  
  
Actions from previous meeting:

1) Test that Zaber-MIA integration works well for microcarrier images
(integration due to be set up within 1 week)

2) Continue optimisation experiments on the Opentrons using a multi-channel
p300, and compare this to manual handling with a p1000. This will allow us to
see whether we can perform these steps with a p300 multi-channel on the OT2 to
improve throughput rather than using the p1000 single channel pipette.

3) Validate trypan blue for cell count analysis using the Zaber

4) 3D print a 96-well plate sized insert for the zaber, which will hold
multiple haemocytometer slides (test this, if successful print more, or
outsource and have 3D printed using metal, if not successful order an insert
from Zaber ~300AUD per insert)

5) Test cell counting of cells on microcarriers using the insert set up on the
zaber using already established region method of imaging (how repeatable is
this process? how comparable is it to manual cell counts? how much time is
saved?)

  
  
Progress on previous meeting actions:

  
(1) MIA integration - complete and working well  
  
  
(2) We found that cells do not proliferate in acf so there has been no
requirement for a highthroughput harvesting strategy  
  
INSTEAD it was decided that optimising highthroughput culturing methods
(erlenmyer > 50ml tubespins) would be a better use of time (see later notes)  
  
(3-5)

Haemocytometer inserts have been 3D printed however these have yet to be
tested with cells on the zaber.  
  
  
What are the current blockers?

To achieve a more highthroughput culturing method with microcarriers we can
move to 50ml spin tubes, instead of erlenmyer flasks. Wherein, it is deasible
to fit 88 spin tubes on one shaker system.  
  
Blockers to moving to 50ml spin tubes currently:

Tube racks suitable for our current shaking systems

Note - tube spins need to shake higher than erlenmyer flask

Actions for optimising highthroughput culture:  
\- Try to attach big orange/blue racks to shakers we have now - if this works
>  
\- Order more of the big orange/blue racks then fit them to the platform -
home build to our current shakers  
\- If we want to prevent tube rattling - wrap tubes with parafilm  
\- If our tube racks and diy attachment to shakers does not work then we may
need to buy a specific shaker platform adaptor for 50ml tube spins - with a
metal rack that screws into plate to hold tubes - entire rack can rotate to
angle tubes - to increase sa for mass transfer (issue is this will come with
high thermo prices)  
  
Potential blockers down the line:  
\- shaker availbility, we have 6 shakers, cannot be used for erlenmyers and
tube spins at the same time due to difference in shake speed rrequirements,
may need to purchase more shakers  
\- when handling 88 tubes a blocker would be centrifuge space and timepoint
sampling (processes which would be much easier if we instead moved to 24-well
deep well plate systems)  
  
  
Questions:

Can we use the opentrons for timepoint sampling? 6 tubes can fit currently

  

Decision:  
  
We will push forward with 50ml spin tubes instead of 24-well deep plates for
now. This is largely due to the expense of these systems and requirement for
higher shaker speeds (above the limit of our current shaker platforms).

24-well deep well plates:  
  
11ml per well, sit on shaker platform in clamp system (2.5 grand), 40 dollars
per plate (disposable), shake speed 400rpm our systems only go up to 300rpm,
shake tubes only need 200rpm so this is why we have moved to this. (Blockers
are expense and shake systems)

Diameter of vessel decreases need a higher shaking energy to keep cells
suspended - shakers specifically designed for this

  

Actions on haemocytometer cell counting (follow on from previous meeting
actions):  
  
\- Test use of haemocytometer in inserts on the zaber and define positions on
the zaber (assign as a 384 well plate - and try to match up to where the
haemocytometer area of interest is - find this well of interest) NATHAN AND
JARED TODAY 01/06/2021  
  
\- If this works will test cell count with sample from biost and using the
cell count tool in MIA (try with the 5x)

  


