  
  
Template email to invite speaker

Dear [Speaker name]  

We have just started a monthly seminar series at Vow, where we invite external
speakers to come in talk about their research, scientific journey and what
they are passionate about.

The audience is mostly made up of the Vow science team, but we may also invite
attendees from nearby biotech companies to join us for the seminar.

We have no set dates at this stage, but are gauging interest. If you would be
happy to come and share your work we could figure out a time and date to suit
you.

  

Kind regards

[Vow organizer]

\-------------------

[email signature]

  




Template email to confirm talk

Dear [Speaker name],

We are honored and excited to have you as our guest speaker on [Date and
time].

Some housekeeping questions:

  1. Please provide a short bio and the title of your talk for advertising purposes.
  2. Do you need parking on the day? A map for where to park in our driveway is attached and a spot will be reserved for you on the day of the event.
  3. Lunch will be provided after your presentation. Do you have any dietary restrictions? 
  4. Will you be presenting from your own device? We do have all the standard connectors but would also be happy to set everything up for you in advance
  5. We would love this opportunity to share with the local scientific community by opening up your talk to external attendees. If however you have concerns about sharing your research with parties outside of Vow we will limit attendance to employees only.

Feel free to email any questions or call me on the day of the talk (direct
number in email signature).

Kind regards

[Vow organizer]

\------------------------------------------

[email signature]

  

Attachments: Parking map

  

  




Flyer template to advertise talk  

 https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1NK-
riQJOSvW8rgD5C39i5C6rnOitfrS1UVEsL6BQWuU/edit#slide=id.p

(when done designing, delete artwork slide and export the flyer slide only as
pdf)

  




# Speaker Introduction Notes

Welcome to today's Vow Invited Speaker Series Talk by Dr. Karina Wright.

Dr. Wright is a Senior Lecturer in Orthopaedics

at the Robert Jones & Agnes Hunt Orthopaedic Hospital

at Oswestry/Keele University, UK

and she is joining us today to talk about her research using

"Large-Scale Quantum® Expansion of cells for orthopedic therapies"

  

Dr Wright's research interests in Regenerative Medicine are in understanding
the biology of cartilage and bone injury and osteoarthritis. She is also
developing clinical diagnostic and predictive tests for the assignment of
cartilage bone and spinal cord injury treatments. Finally, Dr. Wright is using
bioreactors to develop novel cell based therapies for the treatment of
musculoskeletal injury and diseases.

Dr Wright kindly agreed for this talk to be recorded so Vowzers who have kids
to pick up or conflicting meetings can revisit the slides at a later time. Dr
Wright had a great chat with Soroush earlier in the year and gave a wonderful
reference for our soon-to-join Senior Scientist Dr James Henstock, also on the
call from the UK.

Please feel free to stick around after the talk to have a chat with either.

About 5 min from the 30 minute mark, I`ll raise my hand to indicate timing and
with that being said, let`s jump right into the science...


