

Purpose:

  1. to enhance the internal knowledge base at Vow
  2. to develop a platform to set up collaborations and bring external capabilities and knowledge in house
  3. to spark interest in scientific discovery beyond Vow`s day to day work

  

General: This is an unpaid speaking opportunity, but transfers and lunch will
be provided for the speaker. Initially, only Vowsers are invited, but we may
extend invitations to the speaker series to companies and attendees outside in
the future (pending NDA infrastructure).

  

Process (symposia moderator to take care of all steps outlined below, with the
exclusion of sourcing the speaker [step 1]):

  1. Send out an invitation to present (see email template)
  2.  Once speaker and date are confirmed, send out email with housekeeping details (see email template)
    1. 30 min + 15 min questions/discussion
    2. talk title
    3. short speaker bio
    4. parking map
    5. technical details (using own device? email presentation?)
    6. dietary preference
  3. Create Flyer and advertise (see flyer template)
    1. calendar invite to Vow with zoom link (unlimited zoom version with recording)
    2. print and post flyers around Vow
    3. invite external attendees (e.g. Inventia, others to be added), remind them to arrive 15 min early to allow time for checkin
  4. Lock in final numbers for talk attendance 
    1.  organize lunch (Maddie)
    2.  time lunch arrival around 12.30
    3. Ask James to create Zoom link
  5. On day of presentation 
    1. make parking available and provide directions and contact details to speaker
    2. Set up mezzanine according to attendance
    3. check that lunch is ordered
    4. meet speaker at the door
    5. assist with sign-in (NDA)
    6. show speaker where talk will be given and where to dump personal items
    7. set up presentation for speaker (Rohan may be able to help with technical issues), have glass of water ready
    8. promptly at 12 once all seated, introduce speaker using bio provided
    9. after talk, lead discussions session and keep to 15 min
    10. Lunch
    11. quick tour of the Vowse
    12. coffee and chat if speaker sticks around
    13. ensure speaker signs out

  

  


