

Below is a dummy header entry to be copy and pasted into all new EPIC pages in
Lab Archives. Please complete the Link to Clubhouse, Aims and Hypothesis
BEFORE you begin the experiment.




LINK TO CLUBHOUSE EPIC PAGE:
https://app.clubhouse.io/vowfood/epic/18422/improve-
cryostorage?ct_workflow=all  

LINK TO AIRTABLE ENTRY PAGE:
https://airtable.com/tblg6twoOUgW08iLA/viwK5Elaw1pIYYJug/recWLzUx3v06odyNd?blocks=hide

RELATED TO MILESTONE:  Please provide the milestone that this EPIC is
progressing towards

AIM/PURPOSE: To improve the efficiency and effectiveness of operating the
cryobank by performing:

  1. Cryostorage stocktake - what vials are where?
  2. Cryostorage clean out - discard unwanted (old or contaminated) vials
  3. Cryostorage capacity expansion - decontaminate dewars outside the lab and bring into the lab
  4. Cryostorage readiness - fill all dewar places inside the lab with empty boxes, arrange cryoboxes so that items stored longer term will have fewer freeze-thaw cycles
  5. Cryostorage tracking - update Stockyard with attributes that reflect aspects of the cryovials that we need to track (e.g. free space, not just used space).

HYPOTHESIS: That missing and misplaced vials lead to cryoboxes being removed
more frequently and for longer times from the liquid nitrogen dewars, and that
this represents both safety and mission-critical function risks. That lack of
information about what space is free in liquid nitrogen dewars will lead to
cryoboxes being removed more frequently and for longer times, and that this
represents both safety and mission-critical function risks. That these risks
can be mitigated or eliminated by a stocktake of all cryovials, freeing up
space by discarding unwanted vials.

RESULTS SUMMARY: This should only be completed if the data can be visualised
with a single graph/image, otherwise simply state "See Report".

CONCLUSIONS: What were the overall findings? This should be a concise summary
and not duplicate the information in the results/report. For example "We found
that Bovine MuSCs could only achieve a cell density 50% of that observed with
planar culture without undergoing precocious differentiation. These results
mean that we are currently limited to X cells/ml in suspension culture until
we find a way to inhibit precocious differentiation"

NEXT STEPS: This should be a dot point list of any immediate outcomes, changes
to SOPs, as well as providing a direct link to any new experiments arising
from these findings. Importantly, this section should also include any
potential DEPLOYMENTS to the production team


