  
  
* XTT solutions used in todays assay were defrosted on Monday but not combined to make a working solution. They were kept in the fridge during this time and made up into a working solution on the day of this assay. It is unclear wether this effected todays results or not. 




Procedure:

XTT Assay  

Remove macrocarriers from CelCradle Bottle/s:

  1. Warm up fresh media to the desired temperature
  2. Once at temperature transfer the media bottle into the BSC and fill the required number of wells in a 24-well-plate with 300uL of media.  Media ID: A10889 
  3. Transfer CelCradle bottles into the BSC
  4. Aseptically transfer 2-3 macrocarriers into a well containing 300uL media in the 24 well plate using sterile forceps. Place each macrocarrier in its own well.  
NOTE: Do one bottle at a time to minimise the amount of time the macrocarriers
are sitting outside of media

  5. Place the CelCradle bottle back into the CelCradle.  
Note: Be sure to place the bottle back into its original position in the
CelCradle as well as on the CelFeeder Pump. If different feeding parameters
are set up it is important to ensure the correct bottle is receiving the
correct feeding schedule. This is another reason why it is better to do one
bottle at a time.

  6. XTT preparation (done in the dark)

  

  1. Remove 1x package from the CyQuant XTT Cell viability Assay kit in the Main Lab -20 freezer. 1 package contains one bottle of XTT reagent and one vial of the Electron coupling reagent.
  2. Thaw the XTT reagent (component A) in the water bath at 32ºC, vortex the bottle to ensure the XTT reagent is fully in solution
  3. Meanwhile thaw the Electron coupling reagent at room temperature. Vortex the vial to ensure that the reagent is fully in solution. 
  4. Prepare the working solution by combining 6 mL of XTT reagent and 1mL of the electron coupling reagent into a 15 mL tube and mix the working solution by pipetting.  
NOTE: The working solution should be used immediately. If excess XTT reagent
and electron coupling reagent are stored separately (ie NOT mixed into a
working solution) in the fridge they can be used for up to 2 days with some
effectiveness, however the result will be sub-par to fresh stock (reduced by
approximately 25-30%).

  5. Immediately following sample preparation, add 210uL of XTT working solution to each well already containing media/and or a macrocarrier. (Actual amount added = 300uL of media and 210uL of XTT solution)  
NOTE: It is good to have at least one well with media in it but no
macrocarrier to work as a negative control.  
NOTE: The amount of XTT working solution and media volume can also be adjusted
if more solution is required to submerge the macrocarrier. In this case always
make sure that the amount of XTT working solution added is 70% of the media
volume.

  6. Incubated the wells at 37ºC for 4 hours. Timestamp 10:18 - 14:59   

  
Preparing the 96 well plate:  
The plate reader and associated protocol as designed for a 96 well plate so
the media solutions for each condition needs to be transferred to this type of
plate for analysis.

  1.  Remove the 24-well-plate from the incubator after 4 - 4.5 hours.
  2. Give the plate a bit of a swirl to ensure that assay response is distributed through the media in the well and not just concentrated around the macrocarrier.
  3. Transfer the media/XTT solution from each well into 4x wells in the 96-well-plate (125uL each) being careful to label which condition are going into each well. See example below. (Amount added per well:125uL, Number of wells: 4)  
NOTE: Only the media gets transferred into the 96-well-plate. The
macrocarriers do not get analysed.

To Read Plate:  
  
After incubation, read the absorbance at 450 nm and 660 nm using the
SPECTROstar Nano Absorbance Reader

  1. Press In/Out to open the plate reader, place the plate in the correct position and then press In/Out again to close it
  2. Open the "SPECTROstar Nano Absorbance Reader " application on the computer desktop
  3. Once in the program click "Manage protocols"
  4. This will display a list of protocols in the application, select the "XTT LL" protocol by double clicking on it
  5. Once in this protocol, go to layout and make sure whole layout is selected (This makes this easier than selecting specific wells and ensures the plate reader is working correctly on empty wells
  6. Make sure than the wavelengths being measured are 450nm and 660nm
  7. When everything is read press "start measurement". This will take you to a second window where you can double check all of the parameter of the protocol and will need to click "start measurement" again to start the run.
  8. The plate reader will then being to read the plate. Once reading is done rename the file from XTT LL to something relevant and share this file with yourself on Slack by clicking and dragging the file into your chat.

To analyse:

  1. Subtract the 660 nm from the 450 nm reading (The 660nm reading is like your background noise)
  2. Graph this data in GraphPad Prism.  
NOTE: As the cells grow the assay should get darker and the absorption should
be higher

  
  
Plate Map:  

  




Procedure:

pH Reading

5mL was taken from the sampling port of each CelCradle bottle.

  1. Clamp the sampling port tube. 
  2. Sterilize the sampling port by spraying it heavily with 70% Ethanol.
  3. The excess ethanol was then wiped away with a RediWipe and a lure lock syringe was attached to the sampling port and 5mL was drawn out.  
NOTE: Avoid any back flow during the sampling process

  4. Re-clamp the sampling port and disconnect the syringe.
  5. Spray and wipe down the sampling port again with 70% Ethanol
  6. Transfer this media into a 15mL labelled tube
  7. Calibrate the pH meter using the 7.01 and 4.0 calibration solutions 
  8. Measure the pH for each flask.  
NOTE: When the pH meter is sitting in a solution for a long time it can
gradually increase its reading over time, to maintain consistent measurements
only the first pH reading when the probe stops 'thinking' should be taken
down.

10978 = 6.7

10979 = 6.6




DAPI Staining:

1. 1 BioNOC was taken from each flask using sterile forceps   
2\. Add 1mL 70% Ethanol to each well for 15 minutes  
3\. Remove ethanol and wash with dPBS  
4\. Add DAPI (1:1000) in dPBS for 5min  
5\. Remove all liquid and image

Imaging:

  1. Image cells on the Zaber using the DAPI setting with an exposure of 5-10. 
  2. Make sure all of the liquid is removed from the well before trying to image the BioNOC carrier.  
NOTE: If there is enough liquid in the well the BioNOC carrier will move
around during imaging which will result in blurry images. I also find the
images are clearer without liquid being present.

  3. When taking a single image of the centre of the well, the BioNOC carrier might not always be in the correct position. To get the carrier into the correct position; focus the microscope on the centre of the well, take off the lid of the well-plate and use a pipette tip to gently move the BioNOC until it is comfortably in frame.
  4. Perform a z-stack image on a single spot in the centre of the well. 

10979

10978

  


