Method/Procedure


  1. [Experiment Plan]
    1. Cryostorage stocktake - what vials are where, what boxes are where? This is important to do first so that we know where our remaining important vials are, what we can throw out, how many extra cryoboxes we need to fill the empty racks.
    2. Cryostorage clean out - discard unwanted (old or contaminated) vials. This is important to prevent contamination and make space for new vials.
    3. Cryostorage capacity expansion - decontaminate any useful vials from outside the lab and bring into the lab, discard their boxes, decontaminate dewars outside the lab and bring into the lab. This is important to increase capacity before we embark upon our next large biopsy and isolation drive.
    4. Cryostorage readiness - fill all empty dewar racks inside the lab with empty boxes, arrange cryoboxes so that items stored longer term will have fewer freeze-thaw cycles. This is important to improve ease of locating empty boxes and vials, and to increase the longevity of important samples.
    5. Cryostorage tracking - update Stockyard with attributes that reflect aspects of the cryovials that we need to track (e.g. free space, not just used space). This is important to extract maximum value from the work in the previous steps.
  2. [Peer Review]
  3. [Make amendments and Sign off] 
  4. [Report writing (Draft)]
  5. [Review & fill out Report (Full)]
  6. [Ensure all lab books are complete & assign for review]
  7. [Review Lab Books, results, report]
  8. [Make necessary amendments and confirm with reviewer that experiment is complete
  9. [Release note on Project Updates]  

  1. Cryostorage stocktake - what vials are where?
  2. Cryostorage clean out - discard unwanted (old or contaminated) vials
  3. Cryostorage capacity expansion - decontaminate dewars outside the lab and bring into the lab
  4. Cryostorage readiness - fill all dewar places inside the lab with empty boxes, arrange cryoboxes so that items stored longer term will have fewer freeze-thaw cycles
  5. Cryostorage tracking - update Stockyard with attributes that reflect aspects of the cryovials that we need to track (e.g. free space, not just used space).


