Report by Lily Logan
Quick summary of main findings


\- E6 with 0.4 ug/mL of collagen, laminin and fibronectin, and 0.1 ug/mL of
vitronectin supports prolonged cell adhesion to Zein scaffolds over 14 days in
culture significantly better than regular E6

\- Scaffolds in conditions 1 and 2 both did not significantly differ in
confluence from scaffolds in regular E6  

\- EPL coating appeared to improve adhesion initially (Day 1), however it did
not significantly impact prolonged cell adhesion to Zein scaffolds relative to
the uncoated Zein scaffolds


Results and Discussion


The zein scaffolds employed in this experiment were prepared in-house and were
either left uncoated on the day of seeding or were coated with EPL (a
positively charged food additive). In the experimental design we had planned
for the cells to be seeded at a density of 0.8M cells per scaffold, with 5
conditions and 6 replicates per condition. However, the harvest of cells from
ACF-medium was notably low (6.1M per 4CF in ACF-medium vs. 22.3M per 4CF in
serum-medium). Thus, the low cell availability necessitated a change to reduce
the experiment's cell requirement. Subsequently, the seeding density was
reduced from 0.8M to 0.7M cells/scaffold (with 4 conditions and 3 replicates
per condition). The decision to lower the seeding density, as opposed to
replicates or condition number, was a decision based on previous findings, in
which we have seen high seeding efficiency using 0.7M cells per scaffold
(EPIC16070 Day 1 results).

The cell seeding efficiency on Zein scaffolds was calculated 24 hours after
seeding, on Day 1 of proliferation. Observationally, cells which were seeded
onto scaffolds in ACF-medium had a higher seeding efficiency than those which
were cultured and seeded in serum-containing medium (79.3 and 81.2% vs. 63.4
and 60.4%, respectively). However, due to a lack of replicates, no
statistically significant conclusions could be drawn from the seeding
efficiency data.  
  
On day 1 of proliferation the scaffolds were stained with Hoechst dye and
imaged using the Main Lab Zaber microscope. Scaffold confluence was assessed
using MIA analysis. The MIA analysis demonstrated that EPL-coated scaffolds in
serum-containing media were significantly more confluent than than all other
conditions (Figures 1 & 2). Given the seemingly lower seeding efficiency of
cells in serum-medium, this is an interesting result. The discrepancy is
likely due to inherent issues with calculating seeding efficiencies, such as
the lack of replicates, cells remaining stuck to plasticware after
Tryplisation, and inconsistencies between technician's cell counts.

After 7 days in differentiation medium, samples were again stained with
Hoechst and imaged on the Main Lab Zaber microscope. Unfortunately, the
microscope plate stand was improperly secured, which resulted in the samples
being shaken during the imaging session. Consequently, the obtained image set
was too blurry to be used for analysis (Figure 3), and thus no data was
available for Day 7 analysis. The plate stand has since been secured by Team
Engineering to ensure this does not happen in the future.

After 14 days in differentiation medium, the scaffolds were fixed with 4% PFA
and stained with DAPI. The scaffolds were not immunostained for MyoG and MF20,
as previous results from EPIC19524 had demonstrated that antibody staining is
not compatible with cells adhered to zein scaffolds. The DAPI-stained
scaffolds were imaged using the Library Lab Zaber microscope. Confluence was
scored using MIA, and the data was analysed in JMP.

In graphical form, the data appeared to show limited statistically significant
variation between media conditions (Figure 4). However, sorted parameter
estimates (performed on JMP) revealed that scaffolds in condition 3 media were
significantly more confluent than scaffolds grown in any other condition (P <
0.05) (Figure 5). Wherein, condition 3 is E6 medium containing the "middle"
levels of all the tested ECM ingredients (0.4 ug/mL of collagen, laminin and
fibronectin, and 0.1 ug/mL of vitronectin). Condition 3 in this experiment was
a replicate of the most promising condition from the previous EPIC16065, in
which condition 11 also demonstrated the highest confluence out of all other
conditions tested (EPIC16065 results). Thus, the results obtained in this
experiment verify that condition 3 (11in the previous DSD experiment),
comprising of E6 with 0.4 ug/mL of collagen, laminin and fibronectin, and 0.1
ug/mL of vitronectin, does in fact promote the prolonged adhesion of cells to
Zein scaffolds, relative to E6 and the other ECM combinations tested.

EPL was determined to have no significant impact on cell adhesion to Zein by
day 14 in differentiation medium (P = 0.725) (Figures 6 & 7), and is a finding
which correlates with the results from EPIC16065, which also found coating
(Pectin) to play no significant role in long term cell adhesion.

  


Limitations


The main limitation experienced in this experiment was the poor cell growth
observed in ACF-medium. As a consequence of the reduced cell growth in ACF the
cell requirements for the experiment had to be altered, and this resulted in a
reduced number of conditions being tested as well as fewer replicates being
run and a lower seeding density being used. Subsequently, we were not able to
assess all of the comparisons intended and the power of our experiment was
negatively effected. To avoid this limitation in the future we should adjust
our cell estimates from ACF flasks, to anticipate for lower cell yields.


Future Directions


\- Differentiation assays on Zein scaffolds should now be performed using
condition 3 (E6 with 0.4 ug/mL of collagen, laminin and fibronectin, and 0.1
ug/mL of vitronectin) to promote prolonged cell adhesion

\- Media condition 3 should also be employed when performing differentiation
assays to test new scaffolds

\- EPL should not be used in future scaffold experiments as it does not
provide any benefits in terms of long-term cell adhesion to Zein scaffolds


Conclusion


Overall, it was determined that E6 with 0.4 ug/mL of collagen, laminin and
fibronectin, and 0.1 ug/mL of vitronectin significantly improves cell adhesion
to Zein over 14 days in culture, compared with regular E6 medium. EPL coating
does not significantly impact cell adhesion to Zein after 14 days in
differentiation medium, and is therefore not necessary in future scaffold
experiments.


