

## Author: Ella Hodder  




Clubhouse Link: https://app.clubhouse.io/vowfood/epic/21469/dolly12-cells-in-
purecoll-gels-cultured-on-conical-inserts-anchor-
points?cf_workflow=500000005&ct_workflow=all


Aim/Purpose


To stimulate differentiation and alignment through passive mechanical
stimulation using DOLLY12 cells encapsulated in collagen gels on 3D printed
anchor point or conical shaped constructs.


Hypothesis


DOLLY12 cells will survive the collagen encapsulation process and demonstrate
elongation and alignment between the anchor points and across the conical
inserts placed within the gel.


Technical Gap/Background


In a previous experiment we confirmed MuSC survival following cell
encapsulation in a 3% alginate hydrogel. Following on from this finding, we
tested 3D printed anchor point inserts with MuSCs encapsulated in an alginate
hydrogel (see here). However, in the alginate anchor point study we did not
see evidence of cell migration or alignment within the gel. Subsequently, it
was theorised that the alginate gel was not a compatible material for
encapsulated MuSC culture, and that this was most likely due to it's inherent
negative charge and a lack of active binding sites. The 3D printed anchor
point constructs used in the alginate study were generated based on the paper
by Kaplan and Simsa et al., 2019, which demonstrated how 3D printed inserts
can be used to direct bovine muscle satellite cell (BSC) alignment between
anchor points within fibrin hydrogels.

Mosa Meats recently suggested a potential architecture for a scalable
maturation bioreactor based on passive mechanical stimulation. Similar to
above, cells are embedded in a gel matrix, seeded in a circular trough and
cultured until cells fuse into myotubes. Upon contracting, the resulting
circular muscle precursor can evade excessive mechanical stress by wandering
up a cone shaped well, with the cone angle dictating the amount of passive
stress exerted on the cells.  
  
In a more recent study at Vow we observed that DOLLY fibroblasts demonstrated
cell survival and proliferation when encapsulated in a PureCol EZ Gel solution
(ratio of 4:1 with DMEM/F12, see here).  
  
However, thus far, we have not attempted to culture MuSCs in a PureEZ collagen
gel, neither have we implemented anchor point based culture in combination
with collagen encapsulation. Consequently, we are interested to see whether
our MuSCs will be able to survive, migrate, align and mature between 3D
printed anchor points when encapsulated within a collagen hydrogel.


Method/Procedure


Brief summation:

We will prepare cell-laden and cell free collagen gels with or without conical
inserts or anchor point inserts (inserts added before gel setting).
Subsequently, we will observe the samples, assessing for cell
migration/alignment over 14 days. We will try to image cells in situ using
light microscopy (transparent gels). However, if we cannot see the cells we
will stain with CMFDA live cell tracker at progressive timpoints throughout
the study (non destructive sampling i.e. we will keep cells in culture after
imaging). On day 14 in diff media we will measure the thickness and width of
samples with digital calipers while still on the construct, then remove
samples with forceps from anchor-point construct for analysis and weigh them.
Lastly the samples will be primary and secondary stained for MyoG and MF20
(and also DAPI stained) and imaged.  
  
Experiment Plan

Samples:  

n=3 cell-laden collagen hydrogels on anchorpoint inserts  

n=3 cell-laden collagen hydrogels on conical inserts  

n=3 cell-laden collagen hydrogels without inserts  

n=3 cell free collagen hydrogels without inserts

  

= 9 cell-laden samples total

= 12 samples overall  
  

NOTE - Prior to starting the experiment ensure we have enough of the Collagen
solution in-house (we need ~5mls)

Each well will contain 240ul collagen sol: 60ul cell suspension (4:1), this is
a total of ~2.9 mls of collagen overall for the 12 samples. With a final
volume of 300ul per well, this volume is based on the alginate anchor point
study (see here), where we used 280ul per well and found that this volume
sufficiently surrounded the inserts and remained attached during culture).  
  
However, if we need to resuspend the cells in a higher volume of media (may be
hard to get 54M cells in only 540ul) then we will need ~5mls of collagen
solution overall (see second note below).  
  
Cell requirement  
If we are preparing 9 cell-laden samples with the above volumes (and ratio of
4:1), this means we need a total of 540ul cell-media suspension, and if we
want each sample to be seeded at 6 x 10^6 cells/sample then we would need a
total of 54 x 10^6 cells (~56 x 10^6 cells with error) in that 540ul cell
suspension.  
  
NOTE - Do we think we can re-suspend 56M cells in only 540ul? If this cannot
be done then we will resuspend the cells in 1.08mls of media and add to
4.32mls of collagen suspension. We would then end up using ~5 mls of collagen
overall (including the collagen used for cell-free samples).  

NOTE \- Prior to starting the experiment make n=2 cell free collagen gel
samples, n=1 on the anchorpoint insert and n=1 on a conical insert (use the
above volumes and the method below). Leave the samples in culture conditions
(37'C, 5% CO2) for 2-3 days, then observe the samples. Use this mini
experiment to answer the following questions:

Do the gels stay attached to the inserts?

Is the volume of gel used sufficient?

Does the gel contract or change shape on the inserts? - take images

UPDATE - Due to limited time in the lab (covid) this was not done. However, we
did re-test the new inserts with (quickly prepared) alginate to assess
appropriate volumes. 100ul was shown to be a sufficient volume for connecting
the anchorpoint pins and filling the conical inserts. New anchor point print
outs were a good distance from the base of the well.

Experiment timeline and methods

D-10 Culture cells

D-1 Sterilise all inserts and trays (autoclave at least 4 anchor point inserts
and 4 conical inserts and 2 trays)

D-1 Prepare media for the experiment:

For seeding and D1 feed: DMEM/F12 + 20% FBS + 1x P/S (with phenol red) ~40ml
needed for both days

For D2 feeds onward: Differentiation media E6 + 1x P/S (with phenol red)
~130ml for 1 week (make again on D6 diff)  

D0 Harvest and encapsulate cells  

Encapsulation of cells process:

  1. Add sterile inserts into a sterile tray and place the tray onto a non-treated 24-well plate (see plate map below). Place lid ontop and parafilm. Place the plate with the tray and inserts into the fridge for a minimum of 30min before seeding  
  

  2. Prepare cell suspension (54 x 10^6 cells in 540ul of proliferation media, D/F +20% FBS + 1x P/S + P38i) and place in fridge at 4'C for a minimum of 10 minutes (~1hr max). Prepare cell free media 180ul media only (D/F +20% FBS + 1x P/S), and place in the fridge at 4'C (minimum of 10 min)  
  
NOTE IMPORTANT\- If we cannot re-suspend 56M cells in only 540ul then re-
suspend the cells in 1.08mls of media (place in fridge). We would then add
this to 4.32ml of collagen suspension in step 4 (instead of 2.16ml of
collagen). In this scenario we would end up using ~5 ml of collagen overall
(including the collagen used for cell-free samples). In both scenarios we
would only use 180ul media + 720ul collagen for the cell free samples (n=3).  
  
  

  3. Remove PureCol® EZ Gel solution from 4°C storage (fridge)  
  

  4. Add 540ul of the cold cell suspension to 2.16ml of cold PureCol® EZ Gel solution (ratio of 4:1 gel:cells, based on: https://advancedbiomatrix.com/purecol-ezgel.html) IF WE HAD TO RE-SUSPEND CELLS IN 1.08ml THEN ADD 4.32ml OF COLLAGEN.  
  
  

  5. Remove the 24 well plate from fridge and remove parafilm  
  

  6. Whilst the cell-gel mix is still cold seed the inserts (IMPORTANT TO BE QUICK SO MIX STAYS COLD):  
For anchor points: pipette 300ul per well around and between the insert legs
(n=3, see diagram below)  
For conical inserts: pipette 300ul per well around the perimeter trough of the
insert (n=3)  
For wells without inserts just add 300ul to the center of the well (n=3
samples)  
  
  

  7. Repeat steps 3-6 for the cell free samples (add 180ul of cold media only to 720ul cold collagen then seed the plate)  
  

  8. Move the plate containing the gels into the incubator (37°C, 5% CO2). Gelation will occur within 40 minutes, but allow approximately 60 to minutes for firm gel formation (should start almost immediately).  
  

  9. After 60 minutes (or until gel is firm can take up to 90 min) add pre-warmed proliferation media to each well (DMEM/F12 + 20% FBS + 1x P/S + p38i, enough media to fully immerse samples ~1.5mls per well).  
  
Note - add media gently to the side of the well so as not to dislodge the gels
from the insert  
  

D1 100% media change (prolif media)

Very carefully lift the tray into a new 24-well plate containing pre-warmed
media (enough to immerse samples ~1.5mls per well). Are the gels all attached
to the inserts? Write down observations.Try not to dislodge the gels from the
inserts. For wells without inserts lift gels with a sterile spatula.  
  

D1 Image samples under light microscopy - can you visualize the cells in the
gels?  
If not we can take one sample from each condition and stain with sterile CMFDA
and image on the Axio (AF488) SEE GUIDE ON CMFDA STAINING HERE & SEE PREVIOUS
CMFDA PROTOCOL IN LA HERE. Monitor which samples have been CMFDA stained and
which haven't, either only ever stain one sample from each condition with
CMFDA throughout the experiment (the same sample throughout) or try to
distribute the CMFDA staining fairly between samples (n=3). CMFDA should not
kill the cells but the extra time handling and out of cell culture conditions
could effect cell survival.  

D2 100% media change (E6)

D3 100% media change (E6)

D3 Image samples under light microscopy - can you visualize the cells in the
gels?  
If not we can take one sample from each condition and stain with sterile CMFDA
and image on the Axio (AF488) SEE GUIDE ON CMFDA STAINING HERE & SEE PREVIOUS
CMFDA PROTOCOL IN LA HERE. Monitor which samples have been CMFDA stained and
which haven't, either only ever stain one sample from each condition with
CMFDA throughout the experiment (the same sample throughout) or try to
distribute the CMFDA staining fairly between samples (n=3). CMFDA should not
kill the cells but the extra time handling and out of cell culture conditions
could effect cell survival.  

D4 100% media change (E6)

D5 100% media change (E6) > Image samples under light microscopy

D6 100% media change (E6) \+ Image samples under light microscopy - can you
visualize the cells in the gels? (D6 imaging not D7 only to avoid weekend
sampling)  

If not we can take one sample from each condition and stain with sterile CMFDA
and image on the Axio (AF488) SEE GUIDE ON CMFDA STAINING HERE & SEE PREVIOUS
CMFDA PROTOCOL IN LA HERE. Monitor which samples have been CMFDA stained and
which haven't, either only ever stain one sample from each condition with
CMFDA throughout the experiment (the same sample throughout) or try to
distribute the CMFDA staining fairly between samples (n=3). CMFDA should not
kill the cells but the extra time handling and out of cell culture conditions
could effect cell survival.  

D7 100% media change (E6)

D8 100% media change (E6)

D9 100% media change (E6)

D10 100% media change (E6)

D10 Image samples under light microscopy - can you visualize the cells in the
gels?

If not we can take one sample from each condition and stain with sterile CMFDA
and image on the Axio (AF488) SEE GUIDE ON CMFDA STAINING HERE & SEE PREVIOUS
CMFDA PROTOCOL IN LA HERE. Monitor which samples have been CMFDA stained and
which haven't, either only ever stain one sample from each condition with
CMFDA throughout the experiment (the same sample throughout) or try to
distribute the CMFDA staining fairly between samples (n=3). CMFDA should not
kill the cells but the extra time handling and out of cell culture conditions
could effect cell survival.  

D11 100% media change (E6)

D12 100% media change (E6) > Image samples under light microscopy  

D13 100% media change (E6)

D14 Measure thickness and width of samples with digital calipers while still
on the construct. Remove samples with forceps from anchor-point construct for
analysis and weigh on a standard lab balance.

D10/14 Primary antibody staining (MyoG, MF20)

Secondary antibody staining and DAPI (MyoG, MF20)

Image samples

Analysis

Write report

Update Header page  

Ensure all lab books are complete & assign for review  

Have entries and report peer reviewed

Make amendments

  


