

Below is a dummy header entry to be copy and pasted into all new EPIC pages in
Lab Archives. Please complete the Link to Clubhouse, Aims and Hypothesis
BEFORE you begin the experiment.




LINK TO CLUBHOUSE EPIC PAGE: https://app.clubhouse.io/vowfood/epic/21534  

LINK TO AIRTABLE ENTRY PAGE:
https://airtable.com/tblg6twoOUgW08iLA/viwK5Elaw1pIYYJug/recCFgpnJZenZXNrB?blocks=hide

RELATED TO MILESTONE:  PPP Q3 KR3 Achieve a biomass doubling time of less than
24h and final biomass of 10g in a 2L bioreactor in ACF

AIM/PURPOSE: In order to be able to handoff our fibroblast culture process to
a contract manufacturer, we need to demonstrate it successfully at 2 L scale,
and ideally at much larger scales. The University of Technology Sydney (UTS)
Biologics Innovation Facility (BIF) has the capability to scale cultures from
250 mL to 200 L.  
  
In this experiment we should:  
  
    Get an umbrella collaboration agreement signed with UTS BIF to use the 250 mL, 10 L and 200 L bioreactors and facilities at UTS  
    Acquire training and other resources required to operate these facilities  
    Seed, proliferate and harvest cells up to at least 10 L scale in these facilities  
  

HYPOTHESIS: That at least 1 suspension-adapted fibroblast culture, that has
been created by Vow, can be successfully cultured up to at least 10 L scale.

RESULTS SUMMARY: This should only be completed if the data can be visualised
with a single graph/image, otherwise simply state "See Report".

CONCLUSIONS: What were the overall findings? This should be a concise summary
and not duplicate the information in the results/report. For example "We found
that Bovine MuSCs could only achieve a cell density 50% of that observed with
planar culture without undergoing precocious differentiation. These results
mean that we are currently limited to X cells/ml in suspension culture until
we find a way to inhibit precocious differentiation"

NEXT STEPS: This should be a dot point list of any immediate outcomes, changes
to SOPs, as well as providing a direct link to any new experiments arising
from these findings. Importantly, this section should also include any
potential DEPLOYMENTS to the production team


