

Methods for assessing differentiation on scaffolds (a current limitation)  
In previous experiments at Vow we have attempted to use immunofluorescece
microscopy for the assessment of differentiation on our scaffolds. Although
the use of antibody staining with MyoD, MyoG and MF20 has worked with some
materials in the past, including PDLG, PDLG-Pectin and decellularised parsley,
more recently we have found that certain scaffold materials seem to
interfere/absorb the antibodies, which has prevented cell staining. Thus far
we know that zein (including inh-house film based scaffolds and nanofibrous
scaffold from Gelatex) and nanofibrous gelatin (Gelatex) are not compatible
with our in-house antibody staining methods. In July 2021 we ran a small
investigation to verify this further, in which we directly compared C2C12s
grown in planar culture to those on in-house zein scaffolds. The result of the
C2C12 experiment demonstrated that despite high scaffold confluence no
antibody staining could be seen on zein, whereas the same cells in planar
culture were shown to stain strongly for MyoG and MF20.

Subsequently, when investigating new materials it will be important for us to
have an alternative method for assessing differentiation on scaffolds.
Currently we are exploring the use of ELISA's for the assessment of
differentiation. However, due to the reliance on antibody staining in the
ELISA method it can be predicted that we may run into similar limitations,
with the scaffold material influencing the uptake of the stains. As a result
research into methods such as western blotting, which is independent of
antibody staining, may provide a more useful alternative.  
  
Western Blotting

A western blot is a method used to determine the identity, size, and
abundance/amount of expression of specific proteins within a sample from among
a mixture of proteins (sample lysate preparation from tissue or cell culture).
This mixture can include all of the proteins associated with a particular
tissue or cell type. The western blot procedure was named for its similarity
to the previously invented method known as the Southern blot.

The first step in a western blot is to prepare the protein sample by mixing it
with a detergent called sodium dodecyl sulfate, which makes the proteins
unfold into linear chains and coats then with a negative charge. Next, the
protein molecules are separated according to their sizes using a method called
gel electrophoresis. Following separation, the proteins are transferred from
the gel onto a blotting membrane. Although this step is what gives the
technique the name "western blotting," the term is typically used to describe
the entire procedure.

Once the transfer is complete, the membrane carries all of the protein bands
originally on the gel. Next, the membrane goes through a treatment called
blocking, which prevents any nonspecific reactions from occurring. The
membrane is then incubated with an antibody called the primary antibody, which
specifically binds to the protein of interest. Following incubation, any
unbound primary antibody is washed away, and the membrane is incubated yet
again, but this time with a secondary antibody that specifically recognizes
and binds to the primary antibody. The secondary antibody is linked to a
reporter enzyme that produces color or light, which allows it to be easily
detected and imaged. These steps permit a specific protein to be detected from
among a mixture of proteins.

  

  
See the following links for more information on western blot protocols:

https://www.labmanager.com/insights/southern-vs-northern-vs-western-blotting-
techniques-854  
https://www.abcam.com/protocols/general-western-blot-protocol

https://www.mybiosource.com/learn/westernblotting

https://www.moleculardevices.com/technology/western-blot#gref

  

  
  


