Brief Background


The DOLLY12_15D11 clone was generated and banked at MCB2 in March 2021: See
experiment here  
  
Vials of the clone were then expanded (in both planar cultureware and
microcarrier culture in parallel) from MCB2 to WCB2 in May 2021: (see
experiment here)

In this experiment, WCB2 vials from both planar and microcarrier culture were
thawed and the cells were cultured with the intention of expanding over at
least 10x doublings, terminating in the Biostat A 2 L bioreactor. Cells were
also seeded into a differentiation assay to ensure that the capability of
differentiation into muscle tissue had not been lost.

Demonstrating 10x doublings and differentiation capability of the clonal WCB2
cells demonstrates the suitability and process for the use of these clones by
the production team.  
  
To improve harvest efficiency, a tool called the Taipan was developed in a
previous experiment. This is a filtration device that was constructed with
some silicone tubing, metal mesh with 70um diameter pores, zip ties, and a
lure lock connector component which allowed docking of a syringe tube. A new
version of this tool was developed using autoclavable 3D printed parts to
hopefully improve the manufacturability and robustness of the device. This
version of the tool was used for the first time throughout this experiment.


Key Results


Total cell doublings did not exceed 3x over a period of 28 days, with the
number of doublings between passages decreasing to less than 1 despite culture
periods of 5 - 6 days (Figure 1b). The morphology of the cells for both planar
derived and microcarrier working cell bank 2 (WCB2) cultures indicated
senescent cell behaviour. The low cell numbers and many dead cells also
present after day 6 of planar culture in proliferation media (Figure 1f)
indicate poor cell survival.  
  
Serial culture in shake flasks on microcarriers also proved difficult due to
inconsistent harvest efficiencies (Figure 1e), despite using the Taipan
harvest method. Micrographs of florescent nuclei on microcarriers indicated
when a harvest was highly successful (< 1 cells/microcarrier; Figure 1d) and
when it was less successful (>3 cells/microcarrier; Figure 1c), however this
information was not always consistent with the harvest efficiency (Figure 1e).
The total cell number per culture approached the initial thaw number of
500,000 cells after approximately 3 weeks of culturing the cells on
microcarriers in shake flasks (figure 1a).

Figure 1. Planar and microcarrier derived working cell bank 2 (WCB2) cultures
expanded on microcarriers in shake flasks over 28 days. a) Total cell numbers
for the two WCB2 cell cultures indicated poor growth rates and inconsistent
harvest efficiencies, resulting in poor expansion of the cell banks. Note:
cells were removed from the planar derived culture at day 16 and day 22 for
immunofluorescence assays, contributing to the drop in total cell numbers at
these points in this graph. b) Number of cell doublings between passages and
cumulative for both planar and microcarrier derived cell cultures combined,
showing less than three doublings were achieved over 28 days. c) Post harvest
micrographs of florescent nuclei on micorcarriers for culture 7086 from the
planar derived WB2 at day 8 of the experiment. d) Post harvest micrographs of
florescent nuclei on micorcarriers for culture 7135 from the planar derived
WB2 at day 16 of the experiment. e) Harvest efficiency (%) of the three
microcarrier shake flask passages for both planar and microcarrier derived
cultures. The harvest (%) was calculated by comparing the number of cells
counted using a hemocytometer after harvest with the number of cells counted
using Vow's MIA analysis micorcarrier cell count tool taken before beginning
the harvest. f) Micrograph from culture 7278 demonstrating the cell morphology
seen in both the planar and microcarrier derived cell cultures after culturing
in T75 flasks with proliferation media from day 23 to 28 of the experiment.
The sparsely spread cells with splayed morphology indicate senescent cell
behaviour and the many dead cells indicate poor cell survival.

  


Discussion


Total cell doublings did not exceed 3x over a period of 28 days, with the
total number of cells plateauing immediately after the thaw for the
microcarrier derived culture, and after the first passage for the planar
derived culture (figure 1a). A single operator completed this experiment. The
operator initially had little experience with harvesting cells from
microcarriers so initial poor post harvest micrographs (Figure 1c) showing > 3
cells/microcarrier left were initially attributed to human error and
inexperience. Incorrect shaking speeds, extended cell exposure to trypsin and
improper Taipan handling were noted as possible factors in the poor initial
harvest. The Taipan V1 was also used for this harvest, whereas the Taipan V2
was used for all following harvests. Post harvest analysis of the following
harvests using micrographs (Figure 1d) indicated good harvests with < 1
cells/microcarrier. Thus, this indicated the operator had improved in harvest
technique using the Taipan. However, post experiment data analysis revealed
this observation was inconsistent with the harvest efficiency (%), which was
calculated using the hemocytometer harvest cell count with the pre-harvest MIA
cell count as reference. For example, although micrographs indicated the day
16 harvest was successful (Figure 1d), the actual calculated harvest
efficiency (%) was 56% (Figure 1c).

Micrographs of the cultures after trypsinisation showed the cells were round
and 'balled-up' on the microcarriers, indicating the cells were only still
adhered to the microcarriers via electrostatic attraction. As discussed
further in a previous experiment, electrostatic attraction is an important
force in cell adhesion (Khalili and Ahmad, 2015), but as fluid shear
increases, the probability of a cell adhering to the microcarrier decreases
(Schwarze et al., 2019). The Taipan was designed to introduce fluid shear to
overcome the electrostatic attraction force and aid in removing the cells from
the microcarriers. However, more work is required to refine the tool and this
process to ensure that reliable harvests are being obtained. Some problems
with the Taipan V2 were observed when using it during this experiment. One of
the 3D printed filter heads broke apart in the autoclave, where the material
was too thin. One filter head, which had no obvious signs of being
compromised, allowed many microcarriers through the filter, instead of only
letting through the cells. Shorter silicone Taipan tubes also proved less
useful than having longer ones, since the longer Taipans were more easily
coiled inside the E-flask. It was also found to lower the chance of
accidentally of touching a part of the Taipan which could enter the E-flask.

The cells did not appear to grow well on the microcarriers (figure 1a),
indicating they may have become senescent. A proliferation assay using Ki67
immunofluorescence staining with DAPI counterstaining was also performed to
indicate the percentage of proliferating cells, however the process did not
yield useful data. It is suspected this was due to human error rather than a
flaw in the protocol, since the Ki67 stain was not visible and the DAPI
counter stain was barely noticeable, despite cells being visible under phase
microscopy. For more robust data, this staining protocol be repeated or
investigated further, however it was not done so in the present study due to
time restraints and other supporting information which suggested cell
senescence. Micrographs of the cells grown in T75 flasks late in the
experiment showed the cells from both cultures had morphology which indicated
senescent behaviour (figure 1f), supporting the theory the cells were
senescent. Differentiation assays were planned to be standard at first passage
to ensure the cells maintained their ability to differentiate, however only
the planar derived culture had enough cells at the second passage to seed out
the differentiation assay. The microcarrier derived culture was not seeded
onto a differentiation assay due to the very low number of cells available.
The differentiation assay for the planar derived culture was fixed but not
stained, since it this was not considered worth investigating if the cells
were not growing as expected in microcarrier culture.

Previous experiments demonstrated that expanding clones on microcarriers still
enabled them to adhere and grow as expected. However, this was not found to be
the case in this experiment, and inconsistent harvest efficiency further
hampered the serial passaging required for expansion. We have previously
identified that shear stress is needed to recover the cells after detachment,
and this experiment showed that further development on the passaging process
of adherent cells in microcarrier suspension is required. Investigating this
process further is needed to develop efficient methods of growing MuSCs at
scale. For Vow to feed billions of people sustainably, a non-exhaustive supply
of cells that can contribute to delicious food is required, and this
experiment further explores using MuSC clones on microcarriers as a method of
achieving this.  


Limitations


Differentiation assays were not completed due to the poor proliferation of the
DOLLY12-15D11 cells, so no information is provided in this experiment on the
ability of this clone to maintain it's ability to differentiate. The Ki67
assay was also not successful, thus limiting the data available in this
experiment to support the hypothesis that the DOLLY12-15D11 cells had become
senescent. No planar culture expansion was conducted alongside the
microcarrier cell expansion, thus limiting data available to indicate whether
the microcarriers themselves caused the cells to show senescent behaviour. The
Taipan tool was changed for all passages after the first passage for both
cultures from the V2 to V3, without any preliminary testing being conducted on
the V3 beforehand.


Conclusion


Total cell doublings did not exceed 3x over a period of 28 days (Figure 1b),
despite attempting to expand the cells past 10 doublings during this
experiment. The primary reason for not achieving this target during the
experiment was poor cell growth on microcarriers, which was further hampered
by inconsistent harvest efficiency, despite using the Taipan harvest method.


Future Directions


Further investigation is required to determine if the cells from other
DOLLY12-15D11 WCB2s also demonstrate senescent behaviour, such as repeating
Ki67 immunofluorescence proliferation assays. Further microcarrier expansions
of other cell clone cell banks is required to determine if this behaviour is
also demonstrated by other clones. Future microcarrier cell expansions may
consider seeding the same cells into a planar culture to run in parallel and
help determine if the microcarriers induce senescent behaviour or if it is a
factor of the WCB2 banking process. The passaging and harvest process for
cells grown on microcarriers is long and work should be invested in
simplifying the process. The process has already been simplified by the
development of the Taipan harvest method, although further investigation into
the cell harvest yield when using the Taipan is required.


References


Khalili, A. A., & Ahmad, M. R. (2015). A Review of cell adhesion studies for
biomedical and biological applications. International Journal of Molecular
Sciences, 16(8), 18149-18184. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms160818149

Schwarze, J., Grunze, M., Karahka, M., & Kreuzer, H. J. (2019). Attachment and
Detachment of Particles from a Surface under Shear Flow. Journal of Physical
Chemistry C, 123(13), 8153-8159. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b08215


