

## Completed by: Tim Anderson




A metabolite study of animal muscle was previously performed by James Ryall,
where mouse muscle was chemically damaged and then biopsies were taken three
and seven days post injury. Over 200 metabolites were tracked throughout the
course of the muscle recovery, with factors that 'spiked' at certain time
points of particular interest. At three days post injury, the tissue is at a
peak inflammatory state, with many neutrophils and macrophages invading the
damaged areas. After this, the muscle is able to repair very quickly, and so
we paid particular interest in the metabolites which rapidly increase from day
3 to day 7. Further, it is not just those metabolites which spike up that are
of interest; key factors which are rate-limiting reagents in biochemical
pathways will become rapidly depleted, and so factors which decreased markedly
from day 3 to day 7 are also of interest in this study.

In Q2, a DSD screening was performed for 16 factors that were able to 'prime'
satellite cells, resulting in better maturation when they were switched to
differentiation media. A similar study was performed for factors to be added
to the differentiation media, which showed that the B-27 media supplement was
effective in enhancing differentiation. However, B-27 has many sub-ingredients
and these need to be separately investigated in another DSD. The success of
the previous work allows us to build on that experimental design to test more
factors which may be related to satellite cell myogenesis. This study will use
the same framework as the previous DSD experiments but using factors we have
identified in the metabolite study. With an efficient high-throughput assay
already in place, we will be able to run multiple DSDs in this quarter,
providing a deep understanding of which factors will allow the most efficient
myogenesis.

The current top 12 metabolites identified are:

  1. Glycyl-glycine
  2. Fructose-6-phosphate
  3. Tauroursodeoxycholic acid
  4. Dodecanoic acid
  5. Indolepyruvate
  6. Glucose-6-phosphate
  7. Hypotaurine
  8. Sphingomyelin
  9. Creatine
  10. Creatinine
  11. Pantothenic acid
  12. Gelatin (identified from other literature)


