Key findings:


  * Of the nine culture conditions tested, only the serum control E125 flask had viable cells remaining following the conclusion of the 30-day culturing period. Cells continued to survive until day 71 in suspension culture.
  * Addition of methylcellulose appears to have assisted cell survival during the initial transition from adherent to suspension culture. 
  * Lack of survival and adaption of fibroblast cells in methylcellulose conditions was irrespective of the concentration of methylcellulose utilised.
  * Macro codes that were developed in FIJI and deployed into MIA were unable to count cells with low fluorescence due to thresholding issues (more details here).
  * Use of the 50 mL bioreactor spin tubes and Opentrons robots greatly increased the efficiency at which the feed and stain protocol could be performed.
  * Incubator incident (see here for full details) highlights the need for environmental monitoring, especially for long term critical suspension projects.  


Results/Discussion:


The intended outcome of this investigation was to evaluate if the addition of
methylcellulose (MC) was able to encourage fibroblast survival and adaptation
to suspension culture conditions. Similar to previous experiments (EPIC 21699)
DOLLY12 fibroblasts were seeded in either 50 mL bioreactor spin tubes or E-125
flasks at the same seeding density and monitored over a 30-day culture period.
Throughout this culturing period, small samples of all the cultures were
intermittently retrieved and stained to evaluate total and dead cell numbers,
as a means of evaluating culture performance. Macro counts were then performed
on Zaber images captured from these stained cultures.



Evident from the first sampling day was that majority of the 50 mL spin tube
cultures had a relatively high percentage of cells still viable (Figure 1). In
particular cells belonging to the 0.3% and 0.45% MC treatments (Figure 1, b,
c) had the largest overall total cell counts, closely followed by the 0.6% and
1% MC treatment conditions (Figure 1, d, e). Fortunately, the dead cell counts
appeared minimal compared to the total cell counts on day 2, with none
reaching beyond 15,000 (Figure 1). Thus, this indicated that a large
proportion of the cells survived the initial transition from adherent to
suspension culture. Interestingly when comparing the total and dead cell
counts of the MC cultures against the serum control (SC) the SC had the lowest
total count of all the treatments (Figure 1,  f). Therefore, the addition of
MC in the growth media may have assisted with the initial transition period
due to its capability in reducing cell clumping and increasing the viscosity
of the media solution [1]. However, without the incorporation of replicates it
is difficult to correlate if the addition of MC improves cell viability even
during the first week. As the culturing process progressed, all of the 50 mL
tube cultures displayed a downwards trend in which the total cell counts
drastically dropped between days 2 and 14. The period between days 2 and 4 saw
a substantial decrease in total cell counts with majority of conditions
reduced to a third of their total numbers, recorded 2 days prior. Both the
0.3% and 0.45% MC conditions had the highest overall counts, just below
100,000 total cells (Figure 1, b, c). Eventually the counts for all the MC and
SC treatments had either reached 0 or sufficiently close to it such that there
were no remaining viable cells at the conclusion of the 30-day culturing
period. In line with this observation was the gradual increase in dead cell
counts from day 4 onwards. Particularly in the 0.3%, 0.45% and 0.6% MC groups,
the dead cell counts continued to increase across the remaining culturing
period post day 4. Similar to the total cell counts the dead cell counts for
each condition had dropped to zero by day 24, suggesting a lack of cells.
Indeed, following the conclusion of the experiment, all treatments were
manually assessed for viable cells using a haemocytometer, with no treatment
exhibiting cell survival. Therefore, the results concerning the survival and
adaption of the fibroblast cells in the 50 mL spin tubes was irrespective of
the MC concentration utilised in the study. Wherein, no concentration of MC
appeared to offer a superior advantage in the adaption process.

  

  

Figure 1: Total and dead cell counts for 50 mL bioreactor spin tube cultures
throughout the 30-day culturing period. (a) 0.1% MC treatment condition. (b)
0.3% MC treatment condition. (c) 0.45% MC treatment condition. (d) 0.6% MC
treatment condition. (e) 1% MC treatment condition. (f) SC treatment
condition.  

  

  

In addition to the 50 mL spin tubes 2 MC concentrations and a SC control were
evaluated in E-125 flasks. From the E-flask cultures only the SC flask
contained viable cells at day 30 and subsequently remained in suspension
culture, whilst the remainder were discarded. Unlike the 50 mL tubes the 2 MC
conditions displayed relatively low total cell counts on day 4 compared to the
total seeding density (6,000,000 cells) (Figure 2, a, b). By day 16 the 3
E-flasks had been dramatically reduced in cell numbers (<1500). Whilst the 1%
MC and SC flasks continued to deteriorate by day 30, the 0.45% began to
display an upwards increase in cell numbers between days 17 and 28 (Figure 2,
a). Unfortunately as previously mentioned manual counts of the 2 MC flasks
revealed a lack of viable cells and were thus discarded. Despite a measured
total count of 0 on day 28, the day 30 counts of the SC flask revealed that
there were still viable cells present in the media. This flask remained in
culture, with all subsequent counts performed by trypan blue exclusion. By day
50 the flask exceeded a count of 200,000, however reduced to ~35,000 by day
60. Following the incident in which the incubator that housed this culture
vessel was accidentally switched off and remained off for a period of 4 days
(Notion page), ensuing counts highlighted a gradual loss in cell numbers until
eventually day 71 counts confirmed that no cells had survived.

  

  

Figure 2: Total and dead cell counts for E-125 flask cultures throughout the
30-day culturing period. (a) 0.45% MC treatment condition. (b) 1% MC treatment
condition. (c) SC treatment condition.

  

  

References:

[1] Li, X., Ma, R., Gu, Q., Liang, L., Wang, L., Zhang, Y., Wang, X., Liu, X.,
Li, Z., Fang, J. and Wu, J., 2018. A fully defined static suspension culture
system for large-scale human embryonic stem cell production. Cell death &
disease, 9(9), pp.1-9.  


Limitations:


Due to being unable to sterile filter the laboratory grade MC available in
house, a food grade alternative was used instead. Unfortunately, the food
grade version did not have its viscosity grade labeled (i.e., poise- unit of
viscosity) on any of the packaging. Thus, it possibly did not have the same
ability in modifying the viscosity of a solution when compared to the
equivalent offered by Sigma-Aldrich (4000 cP). It could also be likely that
the addition of this food grade MC may have had a minimal effect in promoting
fibroblast cell survival by limiting the shear forces experienced by the
cells. Furthermore, images captured of the cultures containing MC on day 30,
revealed that the MC eventually precipitates out of the media solution and is
only visible under a microscope. In addition, it was observed that the total
cell counts were typically lower than dead cell counts from a majority of
Zaber images, across all the culture treatments. Ideally as the Hoechst dye
stains both live and dead cells, the total cell count should be higher or
equal to the dead cell count. It was later confirmed that the low total cell
counts were a result of cells with low fluorescence such that majority of the
cells stained with Hoechst were undetectable using the designed macro codes.
Finally, it is unclear why the initial cell counts in the E-flask cultures are
relatively low when compared to the total seeding density. Whilst this may be
partially attributed to the lack of cell counts from day 2 on these cultures,
the live/dead staining protocol and use of Opentrons liquid handling robots
was still being optimised during this time.


Conclusion:


The current study was the first at Vow that incorporated both 50 mL bioreactor
spin tubes and the liquid handling Opentrons robots to perform semi-automatic
feeds and staining of culture samples. Despite being unable to successfully
adapt a fibroblast cell line to suspension we have made significant strides in
terms of live/dead staining optimisation, FIJI macro development and fast
suspension automation. Namely we continue to exploit the automation
capabilities utilised in this experiment to perform automatic feeds and stains
and expanding our throughput of up to 30 cultures at a time. Additionally, the
drawbacks identified in the macro code have enabled the development of newer
models that incorporate far better adaptive processes to enhance our cell
count outputs.


Future Directions:


  * Further evaluation on the effectiveness of the Hoechst 33342 Ready Probe staining procedure due to the lack of fluorescent cells stained with this cell dye. 
  * Re-perform suspension experiment using laboratory grade MC (4000 cP). The literature from which this experiment was developed from utilised a similar grade MC. Food grade MC is likely much lower than this and as such have a much smaller impact in limiting the shear stress cells experience from the shaker platform. 
  * It has been investigated in the literature that MC supplementation may be sufficient to enable cell growth in static suspension conditions (see background section of this EPIC). A future avenue for this work could involve a pilot study looking at growth of fibroblast cells in MC supplemented media at static rest. 
  * Re-design FIJI macro code with adaptive thresholding techniques (i.e. binarization) and fast-Fourier transformation filters 


