

Batch Overview

Batch Goals:

  * Optimisation: Improve upon previous experimental findings and continue to find new ways to increase batch yield in adherent cultures 

Experimental Questions:

  1. Is VitC treatment at pre- or post-confluence better?
  2. Can we speed up the time till harvest by seeding higher around 20kcells/cm2?

Reasons for Investigating these Questions:

  1. T175 flask experiments suggest that the final pellet weight can be influenced by when VitC treatment is applied (https://au-mynotebook.labarchives.com/share/Vow%2520-%2520Team%2520Production/NDcxLjkwMDAwMDAwMDAwMDAzfDEwNjUzNi8zNjMvVHJlZU5vZGUvNTE1MDI3OTA0fDExOTcuODk5OTk5OTk5OTk5OQ==) so we wanted to test this in 10CS.
  2. Previous experiments showed that the optimal seeding density was between 7,500cells/cm2 and 15,000cells/cm2 however we wanted to see if we could push it a little further with 20,000cells/cm2 in order to speed up the time until harvest and reduce the overall time of batches. 

Experimental Timeline/Deviations:

Original Plan

Amended Plan  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  

Changes in experimental groups: Cells reached 100% confluence faster than
expected and due to insufficient monitoring the 'pre-confluence' time point
was missed. Therefore instead of looking at pre- and post- VitC confluence, we
decided to look at the difference between pre-treatment with TGFb then VitC
treatment and VitC treatment along (no pre-treatment).  
* Flasks were harvested when peeling occurred in the majority of flasks.  

  
  
  
  
Full Batch Summary:

P1 - 5 days in between passage  
P2 - 6 days in between passage  
P3 - 7 days in between passage  
P4: See below  

  * Set 1: VitC ONLY treatment - 6 days in culture, 2 days in treatment.
  * Set 2: TGFb pre-treatment - 9 days in culture, 3 days TGFb treatment, 2 days VitC treatment.

Experimental Outcomes:

* Graph 1 shows the total pellet weight produced from 3x10CS and 1x2CF in each experimental group  
* Graph 2 shows the treatment time for each group. Only one treatment was applied to Set 1, Set received two separate treatments which are displayed cumulatively on the graph; the top portion shows the time in VitC treatment and the bottom portion shows the time in TGFb treatment. 

Conclusions/Answers to Experimental Questions:

2\. Can we speed up the time till harvest by seeding higher around
20kcells/cm2?  
Yes. Cells reached 100% confluence faster when seeded at 20,000cells/cm2
compared to 7,500cells/cm2 or 15,000cells/cm2 therefore the time till
treatment and harvest was shorter

New question due to experimental group changes: 3. Does pre-treatment with
TGFb after cells reached 100% confluence effect the final pellet weight?  
Pre-treatment with TGFb slightly reduced the final pellet weight of these
flasks despite have the same amount of time in treatment and starting to peel
at the same amount of time as Set 1 (VitC only) flasks. With these results and
those of previous experiments investigating TGFb alone treatment or pre-
treatment it can be determined that TGFb does not show any benefit for use in
Fibroblast cultures.

Unanswered Questions:

  1. Is VitC treatment at pre- or post-confluence better? Due to a change in experimental groups this question was not answered and a different one was answered instead (see above)

  

Overall Key Findings:

  * Seeding higher (up to 20kcells/cm2) will speed up the time until harvest without any detrimental effects
  * The previous gains seen with VitC only treatment (Batch 14, and 15) are reproducible once again in 10CS
  * TGFb pre-treatment at 100% confluence does not give any benefit to fibroblast yield. 

  


