

Below are some notes adapted from my Honours thesis on electrical stimulation
and electrode design. While the thesis focussed on therapeutic neural
electrical stimulation, some of the basic principles apply to electrical
stimulation of other cells in vitro as well. - Jared

Stimulation

In most applications of electrical stimulation of tissue, balanced biphasic
current pulses are used, resulting in a net charge of zero per pulse (Cogan,
2008). However, a net charge will accumulate on the electrode and corrosion
may occur if irreversible electrochemical reactions occur during balanced
biphasic stimulation. More charge delivered during the cathodic phase of an
unbalanced waveform can reduce corrosion of metal electrodes like platinum or
stainless steel. Stimulation waveforms come in a variety of frequencies and
shapes.

Energy efficiency, stimulation selectivity and tissue damage are also other
important considerations for the correct waveform. The underlying mechanisms
of tissue damage from electrical stimulation is still under investigation.
However, a simple relation is commonly used for avoiding damaging electrical
stimulation parameters. This is known as the Shannon model of stimulation
induced injury (Grill, 2018). It approximates a boundary between safe and
unsafe charge injections using the equation:

log(q) = k- log(Q)

where q is charge density (µC/cm2/phase), Q is charge (µC/phase) and k is a
constant determined by observation (Shannon, 1992), usually set between 1.5 to
1.8 for clinical devices. Some therapeutic neural stimulation devices can
stimulate above the Shannon limit, however this usually requires a warning
label. The damage threshold for cochlear implants is commonly regarded as a
maximum charge density of 30µC/cm2, based on the threshold used for deep brain
stimulators and histological studies (Cogan et al., 2016). The electrode
geometric surface area is used to define current and charge densities rather
than the electrochemical surface area, which may be difficult to determine
depending on porous surfaces or coatings (Cogan, 2008).

When a metal electrode is placed into the extracellular fluid of tissue, an
interface forms between the solid and fluid phases. At this interface, a
transient transfer of electrons occurs, resulting in opposing charges between
the solid and fluid phases at the interface. The net orientation of polar
molecules in the electrolyte and chemical species adsorbed to the electrode
also separate the charge. Thus, a change in potential occurs during
equilibrium across the electrode-electrolyte interface. Electrical stimulation
relies on charge injection at this interface, which can occur via two primary
mechanisms, capacitive or faradaic. Capacitive, also known as non-faradaic,
charge transfer can be modelled as a  simple double layer capacitor. Charging
and discharging of the double layer will cause charge distribution but no
electron transfer to occur. Faradaic charge transfer relies on electron
transfer between the electrode and electrolyte which causes reduction and
oxidation of chemical species in the solution. This form of charge injection
creates products in the electrolyte which can diffuse away from the electrode
and will not be recovered by reversing the current direction. Thus, faradaic
reactions are classed as reversible or irreversible. However, the amount of
reversibility depends on the relative rates of kinetics and mass transport.
The products created by faradaic reactions can damage the surrounding tissue
and the electrode, so it is desirable to avoid irreversible faradaic
reactions. Since the exchange current density is a measure of the kinetic rate
of the reaction, reducing the amount of current needed to stimulate tissue is
a desired aspect in electrode design (Merrill et al., 2005).

"The potential range that occurs before the reduction of water (H2 formation)
or oxidation of water (O2 formation) is defined as the water window. Platinum
electrodes have reported charge injection limits between 50-150 μC/cm2 using
biphasic 0.2 ms pulses, safely within limits of the water window." (Wellman,
2018).

The charge density which polarises the electrode to the point of inducing
water reduction or oxidation is a limiting aspect for maximising the
injectable charge from an electrode, since this can result in gas formation
and pH excursions (Cogan et al., 2016). Electrode polarisation simply
describes the state of the electrode in electrolyte once a current is applied,
forcing the electrode potential away from equilibrium (Merrill et al., 2005).
Electrode polarisation during pulsing and electrode impedance can be reduced
by increasing the electrode contact surface area for a standard waveform. By
decreasing electrode polarisation, more charge can be injected before inducing
water hydrolysis or electrode dissolution, which can damage local tissue
(Cogan et al., 2016). The higher the electrode impedance, the higher the
voltage across the electrode-tissue interface. High voltages can lead to
decreased battery life due to increased energy consumption. This can lead to
saturation of the current source and shorten the range of stimulation (Wilk et
al., 2016).

Materials

One of the most important components of a neural interface electrode is the
conductor which delivers current to the site of tissue recording or
stimulation. The traditional choice of conductive materials for neural
electrodes are metals, with nearly 50 years of use to date. The conductive
materials used for implanted electrodes requires careful consideration of the
conductivity, biocompatibility, mechanical stability and corrosion resistance.
Nobel metals and alloys, due to their low reactivity over chronic timescales,
display many of these properties. This is the main reason gold (Au), platinum
(Pt) and iridium (Ir) have long been the most popular materials for neural
electrodes. Non-nobel metals such as tungsten (W), tantalum (Ta), titanium
(Ti) and stainless steel are also used due to their high resistance to
corrosion (Wellman et al., 2018, Cogan, 2008, Won et al., 2018).  
  
For electrodes made of noble metals such as platinum and platinum-iridium
alloys, charge transfer is classified as pseudocapacitive faradaic. This is
because electron transfer occurs across the electrode-electrolyte interface,
but faradaic reactions are confined to a surface monolayer, with the
reversible adsorption of hydrogen onto the platinum surface. Thus, these
metals inject via both faradaic reactive and capacitive double-layer charging.
This is one of the reasons platinum and platinum-iridium are the predominant
materials used for electrode contacts in neural implants (Merrill et al.,
2005, Cogan, 2008). Platinum-iridium electrodes have a lower impedance than
bare platinum, and are commonly used with cardiac pacemakers (Geddes and
Roeder, 2003). Other noble metals such as palladium (Pd) and rhodium (Rh) are
also used for neural stimulation. Charge is injected mainly via double layer
capacitance when using non-noble metals such as titanium, tantalum and
stainless steels for stimulating electrodes (Wellman et al., 2018).

  
Below is an example calculation of the charge density for a stimulating
cochlear electrode:  
  

  

It should be noted that cochlear electrodes are much smaller than what we
require for in vitro electrical stimulation of muscle cells, but the
principles remain the same in regard to staying within the water window.

  

References:

COGAN, S. F. 2008. Neural stimulation and recording electrodes. Annu. Rev.
Biomed. Eng., 10, 275-309.

COGAN, S. F., LUDWIG, K. A., WELLE, C. G. & TAKMAKOV, P. 2016. Tissue damage
thresholds during therapeutic electrical stimulation. Journal of neural
engineering, 13, 021001.

  

GEDDES, L. A. & ROEDER, R. 2003. Criteria for the selection of materials for
implanted electrodes. Annals of biomedical engineering, 31, 879-890.

  

MERRILL, D. R., BIKSON, M. & JEFFERYS, J. G. 2005. Electrical stimulation of
excitable tissue: design of efficacious and safe protocols. Journal of
neuroscience methods, 141, 171-198.

  

WELLMAN, S. M., ELES, J. R., LUDWIG, K. A., SEYMOUR, J. P., MICHELSON, N. J.,
MCFADDEN, W. E., VAZQUEZ, A. L. & KOZAI, T. D. 2018. A materials roadmap to
functional neural interface design. Advanced functional materials, 28,
1701269.

  

WILK, M., HESSLER, R., MUGRIDGE, K., JOLLY, C., FEHR, M., LENARZ, T. &
SCHEPER, V. 2016. Impedance changes and fibrous tissue growth after cochlear
implantation are correlated and can be reduced using a dexamethasone eluting
electrode. PloS one, 11.

  

WON, S. M., SONG, E., ZHAO, J., LI, J., RIVNAY, J. & ROGERS, J. A. 2018.
Recent advances in materials, devices, and systems for neural interfaces.
Advanced Materials, 30, 1800534.


