TestResults Summary  
1Phase-contrast imaging of Test 1 results in this study indicated biphasic
electrical stimulation pulse trains (1.3 V/cm and 4 V/cm, 6 us pulse width, 2
Hz) increased cell mass and structure formation, compared to the control
wells, when using Vow's DOLLY-12 cell line. However, immunofluorescent
staining for MyoG and MF20 during this test was not successful due to the
large muscle pieces lifting off the base of the well during the staining
process. No observations indicated the electrical stimulations caused harm to
the cells.  
  
2Test 2 was a repeat of Test 1 with an improved staining protocol, however the
increase in cell mass and structure formation were not observed a second time,
and lifting of the sample tissue during staining still prevented effective
immunofluorescent analysis. No observations indicated the electrical
stimulations caused harm to the cells.  
  
3No results related to maturation were obtained from this test. Complete cell
death was observed 6 days after differentiation, including in the control
conditions. This test was restarted and complete cell death was observed again
7 days after differentiation, including in the control conditions.  
4Stimulated C2C12 cells (4 V/cm and 6 V/cm, 6 us pulse width, 2 Hz) did not
demonstrate increased cell mass and structure formation, compared to the
control wells, as was originally observed in Test 1. However, no observations
indicated the electrical stimulations caused harm to the cells.
Immunofluorescent staining for MyoG and MF20 during this test was not
successful due to the large muscle pieces lifting off the base of the well
during the staining process, despite an altered staining protocol which
utilised warmed reagents. Contraction tests were conducted on these cells
before fixing and staining, by utilising short durations of pulse trains (6 us
pulse width, 2 Hz), while increasing the voltage to the maximum output by the
StimJim stimulator (varying voltages up to 10 V/cm). However, no visible
contraction was observed by the cells during these tests.  
5Test 5 was a repeat of Test 4, without any contraction tests performed. No
observations indicated the electrical stimulations caused harm to the cells.
Regular fixing for Plate 1 was again unsuccessful due to cells lifting off the
base of the well, however a Bradford assay was successfully completed on Plate
2, demonstrating no difference between stimulated and control conditions.  
  
  


