

LINK TO CLUBHOUSE EPIC PAGE:
https://app.clubhouse.io/vowfood/epic/21489/electrical-stimulation-biological-
testing?vc_group_by=day&ct_workflow=all&cf_workflow=500000005

RELATED TO MILESTONE:  Enhancing maturation based on 2x Myosin expression or
60% MyoG.

AIM/PURPOSE: To determine the effects of electrical stimulation using charge
balanced electrical stimulation and stainless steel electrodes on DOLLY-12
MuSC differentiation and maturation, indicated by the expression of Myosin and
MyoG.

HYPOTHESIS: Stimulated DOLLY-12 MuSCs will demonstrate greater differentiation
and maturation than unstimulated cells, and stainless steel electrodes (304)
will have no negative impact on cell viability.

RESULTS SUMMARY: See report.

CONCLUSIONS:

Electrical stimulation of DOLLY-12 and C2C12 cells using stainless steel
electrodes (304) caused no harm to the cells or obvious unwanted biochemical
reactions when using biphasic stimulation with the StimJim stimulator.
However, no repeatable results indicated the cells gained improved maturation
due to the stimulation. Problems experienced in this study with analysing
Myosin / MyoG expression and complete experiment cell loss were addressed in
Q4, however problems with the stimulation infrastructure remain unresolved.  

NEXT STEPS:

The issue of cells peeling off the bottom of the well prevented successful
analysis by immunofluorescent staining for indicators of muscle cell
maturation. This issue was addressed in Q4 experiments, which established
Laminin and Geltain as culturewear coatings that prevented peeling and allowed
for greater growth of 2D cell culture.  
  
The mysterious complete cell death issue which interrupted Test 3 was
experienced in other experiments during Q3 2021 and was investigated in Q4. It
was established in that investigation that DOLLY-12 cells in E6
differentiation media suffered the greatest cell loss compared to other
conditions tested, indicating this was the reason for the complete cell death
experienced during this study.

Refining and scaling out the stimulation infrastructure, while also automating
the experiment process to enable higher throughput is required to determine
the right stimulation conditions to improve maturation with electrical
stimulation.


