Background


The intended outcome of this study was to investigate if the addition of
fibroblasts on Zein scaffolds, and the addition or absence of Vitamin C would
assist in the prolonged adhesion of MuSC on Zein scaffolds throughout the
process of differentiation. The justification of using fibroblast is that they
generate collagen which can act as an adhesive substrate for MuSC, and
therefore promote MuSC adhesion. Additionally Vitamin C enhances collagen
production in fibroblast cells and cause extensive ECM protein deposition
which can promote the adhesion of MuSC on fibroblast cells.


Quick summary of main findings


1\. Unable to stain fibroblast cells on Zein scaffolds using the TE-7 antibody
and MuSC with anti-MyoD antibody.

2\. Could not determine if addition of fibroblast cells and/or Vitamin C was
beneficial for MuSC adherence due to the inability to co-stain fibroblasts and
MuSC.

3\. DAPI stain can successfully stain cell nuclei and highlight the presence
of cellular DNA on Zein scaffolds.


Discussion


A prominent finding of this study was that both sheep fibroblast and MuSC were
unable to be successfully stained using the TE-7 and MyoD antibodies
respectively. This outcome was irrespective of whether fibroblast and MuSC
were cultured together, individually or in the addition or absence of Vitamin
C. Furthermore positive expression of TE-7 and MyoD could not be detected even
when the Zein scaffolds were probed with each of these antibodies individually
or in tandem. The apparent lack of a fluorescent signal from the TE-7 antibody
may potentially be attributed to the nature of the TE-7 antibody. As
previously explored in an separate optimisation experiment the TE-7 antibody
used in this study has a tested species reactivity against mouse and human
fibroblasts only. It is plausible that our in-house sheep fibroblasts lack the
physical and chemical similarities in the target antigen and thus unable to be
stained with this particular antibody. However this does not provide an
explanation as to why the MyoD antibody could not sufficiently stain MuSC
seeded onto Zein scaffolds even in conditions lacking fibroblast cells.
Positive MyoD stains have been obtained from MuSC seeded onto Zein scaffolds
previously. A multitude of potential causes may be possible for the lack of
MyoD signal, namely, incorrect primary antibody dilution, target protein not
properly expressed, or absorbance of the primary antibody by the Zein
scaffolds. However the lack of a positive control utilised in this experiment
makes it difficult to speculate the possible cause. Therefore, the inclusion
of adherent or scaffold seeded C2C12 cells during the staining procedure would
be beneficial for any future co-culture experiments as a positive control to
confirm myogenic staining.

A critical step involved in the process of evaluating whether fibroblast cells
could improve MuSC adherence was the application of mitomycin C. Mitomycin C
is chemotherapeutic agent utilised in cell culture to halt cellular
replication by inhibiting DNA synthesis, with the rationale behind its
application being to prevent the fibroblast cells from outcompeting and
eventually overgrowing the MuSC. However due to its nature as a chemotherapy
compound and its status as a potential carcinogen warrants its use as
undesirable. A potential avenue to avoid the future use of mitomycin C in any
co-culture experiments including fibroblast cells can involve the use of a
freeze thaw cycle. Previously described in the literature, the freeze thaw
cycle entails repeatedly freezing a culture sample at -80'C and thawing with
warmed dPBS. This process maintains the ECM proteins deposited by the
fibroblasts, whilst simultaneously causing cell apoptosis via osmotic
swelling. However it is unclear if Zein scaffolds are able to maintain their
structural integrity through such as process.


Limitations


A major limitation experienced in this study was to inability to co-stain
fibroblast and MuSC seeded onto Zein scaffolds. Consequently this made it
difficult to differentiate between the two cell types based off the DAPI stain
alone. An additional limitation involved not being able to stain for MyoD
protein as an indication of MuSC presence even in situations where the only
the MyoD antibody was used.


Future work


Any future work involving co-culture systems requires a procedure in which the
different cell types are able to be stained using immunofluorescence. This
represents the most pressing issue if it is required to develop cultures with
multiple cell types present. Other avenues of future work involve:

1\. Identify a stain specific for fibroblast cells beyond the TE-7 and
Vimentin antibody due to complications involving these antibodies (see
experimental report for a study optimising this process here)

2\. Troubleshoot MyoD staining on Zein scaffolds (inclusion of C2C12 positive
control for myogenic staining)

3\. Test the freeze thaw cycle on fibroblast seeded Zein scaffolds as an
alternative to mitomycin treatment. Confirm with live/dead staining (CMFDA +
Propidium iodide)


Conclusion


This study represents the first at Vow investigating the use of a co-culture
system to improve MuSC adhesion onto Zein scaffolds. At the moment it is
unclear whether the addition of fibroblast cells or Vitamin C can promote the
adhesion of MuSC onto scaffolds due to limitations in antibody staining.
However the general premise of utilising multiple cell types to promote MuSC
development still holds promise above standard monoculture experiments.


