

Adaptation of fibroblasts to suspension culture is critical if we want to
achieve hand off of this product to production by the end of Q3.

Vow aims to feed billions of people. To achieve this scale, we need to be
growing cells in suspension in a large bioreactor. Thus, we need to achieve
suspension culture of fibroblasts as soon as possible.

Fibroblasts were not successfully adapted to suspension in this trial.

Fibroblasts placed into a 50mL tube in DMEM/F12+20%FBS+1xPS declined in number
and viability rapidly. By Day 5 post-suspension adaption, there were
approximately 500k cells left in suspension and by Day 7, over 90% of those
remaining cells were dead. These control cells mirrored the results seen in
suspension adaptation attempt #1. Fibroblasts treated with 1:500 anti-clumping
agent behaved similarly. Fibroblasts treated with 1:100 anti-clumping agent
recorded 6 days of proliferation and achieved ~95% viability. Fibroblasts
treated with 1:100 Revita cell (a ROCK inhibitor) also achieved ~95%
viability, though not as quickly as the fibroblasts treated with anti-clumping
agent. It appears that the incorporation of 1:100 anti-clumping agent may
assist with adaptation to suspension culture and the combination of ROCKi with
anti-clumping agent should be explored.

The media may not be optimised for suspension culture

There are a number of specific medias that are supposedly optimised for
suspension culture. These include HyClone CDM4Avian, HyClone HEC293, HyClone
ActiPro, and HyClone CHO cells. We will order some of these basal medias which
have more concentrated micro and macronutrients to support growth of cells at
a higher density in suspension. These medias also may include ingredients that
specifically support suspension culture of cells.

Including other components to the media may also allow us to achieve
suspension. RGD and YIGSR peptides are commercially available and bind
fibroblast integrins. Fibroblast integrins typically bind other fribroblasts
or the bottom of a plastic flask or plate in adherent culture. Thus, binding
these intergrins may induce signalling that compels fibroblast to proliferate
in suspension as if they were bound to a plastic culture plate.

In addition, serum contains a variety of proteins that facilitate cell
adherence. Perhaps reducing the amount of serum in our media will encourage
adaptation of fibroblasts to suspension. Inclusion of components like knock-
out serum replacement or growth factors like IGF, PDGR, or FGF may encourage
proliferation of fibroblasts even in the absence of serum.  
  
50mL tubes successfully supported these experiments.

This was the first time we trialed using 50mL tubes for suspension adaptation.
It appears that we can successfully use this model in the future.

  

Proposed next steps for subsequent trials of suspension culture adaptation

5 x conditions: Hyclone suspension medias + 10% FBS + RGD & YIGSR peptides +
1:100 anti-clumping agent

5 x conditions: Hyclone suspension medias  \+ Knockout serum replacement + RGD
& YIGSR peptides \+ 1:100 anti-clumping agent

5 x conditions: Hyclone suspension medias  \+ 100ng/mL FGF, IGF1, PDGF + RGD &
YIGSR peptides \+ 1:100 anti-clumping agent + (ACF edition)

  

  

In addition, we should try to adapt fibroblasts to suspension from an earlier
stage, i.e. directly after fibroblasts are isolated from a biopsy or from a
nearly-raw isolate stage. We have a new biopsy coming in the first week of
July that we can test this with. We can also test it with chicken fibroblasts
that were just barely isolated before being frozen down. The fibroblasts used
in this experiment have been grown with 20% FBS for ~10 passages and thus may
be adapted to prefer adherent culture and large amounts of serum more than
cells frozen down at a very early passage.

  


