  
  
Findings

Trialled medias and/or culture conditions do not support adaption of F_DOLLY12
cells to suspension culture.  
After 30 days, none of the cultures had successfully produced proliferating,
suspension adapted cells, as indicated by very low cell numbers at our final
count (Day 29). On the final sampling day (day 29) cell numbers ranged form
just 4,000 (pluronic) to 45,000 (high seeding) live cells per culture.

Cultures containing Rock inhibitor did not retain improved cell viability
beyond day 2 sampling.  
At day 2 sampling, medias containing ROCK inhibitor appeared to promote cell
survival. Unfortunately, the protective effects of ROCK inhibitor were not
maintained throughout the experiment. At all time points beyond day 2, there
was no noteworthy difference in live cell numbers when comparing cultures with
or without ROCK inhibitor.

The culture seeded at a higher density retained a higher proportion of its
seeded cell number compared to the control.  
Between days 8-22, the culture seeded with 34M cells retained a greater number
of live cells (as a proportion of its original seeding number) compared to
that of the control culture which was seeded with 8.5M cells.




Limitations

Subjectivity of cell counts  
Cultures contained a large amount of cellular debris which interfered with
automated cell counting of trypan blue stained cells. Manual counts were also
made more challenging due to the debris. In addition to this, cellular
morphology appears to change during suspension cell adaption with cells
appearing less spherical and with greater variability in size. This makes it
difficult to differentiated between live and dead cells and even between cells
and debris. The resultant counts are therefore subjective, making the data
obtained less reliable.

Lack of replicates  
As N=1 for each of our treatments it is not possible to perform any meaningful
statistical analysis of our results. unfortunately, performing replicates was
not feasible due limitations of scientist time (see next point). The lack
replicates, coupled with the subjectivity cell counts, somewhat undermines the
reliability of the data collected in this experiment.  
  
Labour intensive nature of the experimental design.  
Our current experimental design is highly labour intensive. The average time
taken to perform a feed + trypan blue stain and count on 4 suspension cultures
is between 2 to 2.5 hours. The most time consuming process is cell counts,
which are are made more difficult due to debris and unusual cell morphologies.




Discussion

Observed short term benefits of Rocki on cell viability  
Rho-associated protein kinase (ROCK), Y-27632 inhibitors have been
demonstrated to increase survival and proliferation of some cell types in
suspension culture including human embryonic stem cells [1], murine salivary
gland stem cells [2]. The addition of ROCKi Y-27632 to culture media has also
been shown to enhance post-thaw viability of MSCs [3] and embryonic stem cells
[4] by supressing cell apoptosis. In contrast, cord blood CD34+ cells and
hematopoietic progenitor cells have dramatically decreased cell survival and
proliferation in the presence of ROCKi Y-27632 [5]. These conflicting studies
suggests that ROCKi may have varied affects depending on cell type, and cannot
be assumed to be beneficial to cell viability. In our current study, cultures
containing ROCKi initially showed superior cell survival (day 2), however this
benefit was lost by our second sampling point (day 8). This indicates that
ROCKi aids survival of F_DOLLY12 cells during the initial stages of suspension
cell adaption but may not provide any further benefit in the longer term.

Improved viability of cells at higher densities  
Between days 8-22 the culture seeded at a high seeding density of 34M cells
retained a higher proportion of live cells when compared to the control,
seeded at 8.5M cells. This may indicate that cell density plays an important
role either in cell viability or in proliferation. In this study, we
maintained a constant media volume of 10mL regardless of cell numbers which
may have negatively affected cell survival and proliferation. Adapting media
volumes, or moving to smaller vessels when cell numbers decline, may
circumvent this problem.

  

1\.         Watanabe, K., et al., A ROCK inhibitor permits survival of
dissociated human embryonic stem cells. 2007\. 25(6): p. 681-686.

2\.         Lee, J., S. Park, and S.J.A.o.o.b. Roh, Y-27632, a ROCK inhibitor,
delays senescence of putative murine salivary gland stem cells in culture.
2015\. 60(6): p. 875-882.

3\.         Heng, B.C.J.T. and cell, Effect of Rho-associated kinase (ROCK)
inhibitor Y-27632 on the post-thaw viability of cryopreserved human bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells. 2009\. 41(5): p. 376-380.

4\.         Li, X., et al., The ROCK inhibitor Y-27632 enhances the survival
rate of human embryonic stem cells following cryopreservation. 2008\. 17(6):
p. 1079-1086.

5\.         Bueno, C., et al., The ROCK inhibitor Y-27632 negatively affects
the expansion/survival of both fresh and cryopreserved cord blood-derived
CD34+ hematopoietic progenitor cells. 2010\. 6(2): p. 215-223.




Future directions

As current media formulations do not appear to support F_DOLLY12 adaption to
suspension culture, alternative medias will be investigated.  
Katie has prepared a document listing reagents which we believe may benefit
cellular viability and proliferation. See here:https://au-
mynotebook.labarchives.com/share/Vow%2520-%2520Team%2520Science/MzU3My43MDAwMDAwMDAwMDAzfDEwNjMxNy8yNzQ5LTIwNTk0L1RyZWVOb2RlLzIwMjI3Mjk2MTN8OTA3MS42OTk5OTk5OTk5OTk=  

Our next trial, which is currently already underway, will involve media
supplementation with RGD and YIGSR integrin binding peptides. See lab book
here: https://au-
mynotebook.labarchives.com/share/Vow%2520-%2520Team%2520Science/MjUyMi4wfDEwNjMxNy8xOTQwLTE0MTc4L1RyZWVOb2RlLzE4MTk2NTUzMTR8NjQwMi4w

YIGSR and RGD are well characterised peptides derived from the ECM proteins,
laminin and fibronectin and are involved in cell adhesion to the ECM through
integrin binding [1]. Synthetic YIGSR and RGD are commonly used to promote
cellular attachment to biomaterials [2] however they can also be employed to
prevent cellular adhesion in suspension cultures. When media is supplemented
with soluble YIGSR and/or RGD, cell attachment receptors can become saturated
and adhesion is inhibited [3, 4]. Our next suspension trial, suspension trial
number 4, aims to asses the affects of YIGSR and RGD on F_DOLLY12 survival and
proliferation in suspension culture.  
  
Adaption of media volumes with decreasing/ increasing cell numbers  
The results of this study indicate that cell density can influence cell
viability and/or proliferation. In future therefore, we will aim to adapt
media volumes or culture vessel size in response to changing cell densities.

Filtering of cultures during feeds and counts  
In this trial, we did not filter cultures using a 70um cell filter as we did
in our pilot study, see here:https://au-
mynotebook.labarchives.com/share/Vow%2520-%2520Team%2520Science/NzA3LjJ8MTA2MzE3LzU0NC0yNDk0L1RyZWVOb2RlLzIxNzgwMTk2MTN8MTc5NS4xOTk5OTk5OTk5OTk4).
The decision to skip the filtration step in this study was made due to concern
that viable cells may have been lost from the suspension during this process.
It is likely that some cells are lost via filtration however the large amounts
of debris in cultures in this study made viability counts difficult. Removing
cell aggregates and debris from the culture will simplify cell counting and
also allow us to better select for cells that have adapted to single cell
suspension.

High throughput protocols for suspension culture trials  
The adaption of fibroblasts to suspension is crucial to Vows mission to feed
billions of people. Our production capacities in adherent culture are
approaching a plateau and we will rely heavily on suspension culture to
deliver the volume of cells needed to produce our first commercial product.
Due to the critical need for suspension adapted cells, high throughput methods
for media screening are required in order to hit this goal as soon as
possible. Ideally, our future suspension culture screening experiments should
be capable of supporting upwards of simultaneous 100 cultures, to support DOE
style experimental designs. Discussions are already underway for the
development of high throughput suspension trials using the Opentrons and 24
well plates which will allow us to screen a multitude of different medias and
growth factors simultaneously.

Development of alternative data acquisition tools to assess viability of cells
in suspension.  
We are currently in the process of developing high throughput live/dead
staining protocols combined with automated cell counting may help to reduce
manual labour in future experiments. These will likely involve
Calcein/Propidium iodide or Hoechst/Propidium iodide staining following by
imagining and automated counting via the Zaber and Mia Capture. The cell
counting macro is currently being optimised for use with cells in suspension.
When we move to DOE style suspension experiments, it is hoped that the
Opentrons can be utilised for sample selection and staining for counts. We are
currently working with engineering to achieve this.

  

1\.         Boateng, S.Y., et al., RGD and YIGSR synthetic peptides facilitate
cellular adhesion identical to that of laminin and fibronectin but alter the
physiology of neonatal cardiac myocytes. 2005\. 288(1): p. C30-C38.

2\.         Huettner, N., T.R. Dargaville, and A.J.T.i.b. Forget, Discovering
cell-adhesion peptides in tissue engineering: beyond RGD. 2018\. 36(4): p.
372-383.

3\.         Ruoslahti, E.J.M.N.p.i.c.a.R. and i. Science, Pierschbacher.
1987\. 238: p. 491-497.

4\.         Dai, W., J. Belt, and W.M.J.B.T. Saltzman, Cell-binding peptides
conjugated to poly (ethylene glycol) promote neural cell aggregation. 1994\.
12(8): p. 797-801.

  


