Brief Background


Cultured meat which is biologically equivalent to slaughtered meat is a long
term aim for Vow, due to the sensorial and nutritional aspects of such a
product. The content and nature of the proteins, the composition of volatile
compounds and the presence of myoglobin are the molecular characteristics
which make traditional meat so difficult to replicate with plant protein
(Fraeye et al., 2010). One of the most important biophysical cues for muscle
development within the body is electrical impulses from motor neurones (Castro
et al., 2020). Electrical stimulation setups aiming to replicate this aspect
of the cell's natural microenvironment vary greatly between studies (Banan
Sadeghian et al., 2018; Donnelly et al., 2010; Ko et al., 2018; Mobini et al.,
2016; Serena et al., 2008; van der Schaft et al., 2013). Some common aspects
of these systems are the use of biphasic stimulation waveforms and platinum
(Mobini et a., 2016) or stainless steel electrodes (Donnelly et al., 2010).

This series of tests looks at the effects of a simple set up using cheap
materials and minimal hardware. A cheap and simple electrode set up may be the
easiest to scale but poses the most risk of causing damage to the cells
through media pH changes or other biochemical reactions. The stimulation setup
used in this series of tests will consist of a charge balanced stimulator with
stainless steel electrodes. Preliminary tests (EPIC21480) have shown that
without charge balanced stimulation, severe electrode dissolution and
biochemical reactions occur within the media using stainless steel electrodes.
Other electrode materials such as Pt are much more expensive than stainless
steel, so it will be of value to investigate this cheaper electrode material
first, with charge balanced stimulation.


Key Results


Test 1 results indicated increased DOLLY-12 cell mass and structure formation
in the centre of the stimulated wells (6 us pulse width, 2 Hz) compared to the
control wells (Figure 1). This was observed using phase-contrast imaging in
5/6 of all stimulated wells with no significant difference in results
determined between the two different voltages applied (4 V/cm and 1.3 V/cm).
However, these results were not repeatable, even when using the same
experiment setup and stimulation parameters. Complete DOLLY-12 cell death
observed across all conditions, including controls, often cut experiments
short and contributed to inconclusive results. Contraction tests did not
demonstrate any obvious contractions of C2C12 MuSCs, when stimulated up to the
maximum voltage range of the StimJim using the chosen pulse train parameters
(6 us pulse width, 2 Hz). A Bradford assay of stimulated C2C12 MuSCs (4 V/cm
and 6 V/cm, 6 us pulse width, 2 Hz) did not indicate any difference between
the stimulated and control conditions.

Figure 1: Micrographs of DOLLY-12 muscle cells after 7 days of biphasic
electrical stimulation using stainless steel electrodes, showing select
regions of interest with the centres of the wells. The micrographs are
representative of the differences observed between the conditions in the
centre of the well, not of the entire well.




Discussion


Phase-contrast imaging of Test 1 results in this study indicated biphasic
electrical stimulation pulse trains (1.3 V/cm and 4 V/cm, 6 us pulse width, 2
Hz) increased cell mass and structure formation, compared to the control
wells, when using Vow's DOLLY-12 cell line. However, immunofluorescent
staining for MyoG and MF20 during this test was not successful due to the
large muscle pieces lifting off the base of the well during the staining
process. This result would have contributed to the team's Q3 milestone of
enhancing maturation based on 2x Myosin expression or 60% MyoG. Thus, this
experiment was repeated in Test 2 with an improved staining protocol, however
the increase in cell mass and structure formation were not observed a second
time, and lifting of the sample tissue during staining still prevented
effective immunofluorescent analysis. Rather than repeating the same
parameters again, Test 3 investigated the effect of higher voltage stimulation
(4 V/cm and 6 V/cm; Figure 2b). All other parameters, such as pulse width and
frequency, were retained from Test 2. However, all cells in this experiment,
including those in the control wells, died after 6 days in E6 differentiation
media. Assuming this was caused by expired media, Test 3 was restarted.
However, once again all cells died after a week in E6 differentiation media.
Due to this issue, common C2C12 cells were used instead of DOLLY-12 cells in
Test 4, with the same stimulation parameters as Test 3. No obvious difference
between conditions was observed using phase-contrast imaging, however cells
were observed to grow well in all conditions up to the day of fixing, after
two weeks in E6 differentiation media. Contraction tests were conducted on
these cells, by utilising short durations of pulse trains (6 us pulse width, 2
Hz), while increasing the voltage to the maximum output by the StimJim
stimulator (10 V/cm). No visible contraction was observed by the cells during
these tests. Towards the end of the experiment, the cells lifted off the base
of the well prior to fixing, collecting in floating balls of cells. Fixing
with warmed reagents did not prevent the remaining cells from further lifting
off the base of the well. Analysis via immunofluorescent staining for MyoG and
MF20 was again unsuccessful, since the floating cells were difficult to stain
and image. Test 4 conditions, still using C2C12 cells, were repeated in Test
5. Regular fixing for Plate 1 was again unsuccessful due to cells lifting off
the base of the well, however a Bradford assay (Figure 2d) was successfully
completed on Plate 2, demonstrating no difference between stimulated and
control conditions.

Figure 2: Electrical stimulation and maturation analysis of DOLLY-12 and C2C12
cells. a) Oscilloscope used to display the waveform of the pulsetrain being
used on the two separate stimulation channels. A rectangular shape indicated
no electrodes were not submerged in the media of any culture wells on that
channel, whereas a curved waveform indicated that at least one well on that
channel had submerged electrodes. b) Example schematic (b) and image (c) of a
typical test setup to stimulate two culture plates with 6 wells stimulated in
parallel per channel. d) Schematic of the Bradford assay setup for a more
quantitative maturation analysis compared with observations of phase-contrast
images.

The results from Test 1 were consistent with previous literature that
demonstrated electrical stimulation improved cell fusion to form multinucleate
myotubes (Ko et a., 2018), however no alignment of cells were observed. Cell
alignment has been noted in many previous studies (Table 1), however the exact
experiment setup varies greatly between studies. The parameters chosen within
this series of tests at Vow were based on some of the more frequently used
parameters (Table 1). The exact setup used is not identical to any particular
study, however the stimulation waveform is most similar to that by van der
Schaft et al., 2013, utilising a pulse train with 6 us pulses and a frequency
of 2 Hz (Table 1). There are many different variables to be controlled during
electrical stimulation experiments of muscle cells. Within just the
stimulation waveform, these variables include the pulse frequency, pulse
width, pulse train duration, voltage, current, and the work/rest ratio.
Defined as recovery periods between pulse trains, the work/rest ratio was not
utilised in this study due to the stimulation infrastructure available. This
study only used a single continuous pulse train during stimulation. A range of
voltages, with similar pulse trains to previous literature (Furuhashi et al.,
2021; Banan Sadeghian et al., 2017) were also used to conduct contractile
tests, however no contractions were observed under the microscope. In these
previous studies, contraction of muscle cells via electrical stimulation was
found to correlate with key indicators of myotube maturation. The beginning of
stimulation in relation to the differentiation of the muscle cells is another
variable which differs between studies (Table 1), however most studies
commence stimulation at days 3-5 of differentiation. The current study used
two plates with the same stimulation parameters and experiment setup, to begin
stimulation at day 3 for plate 1 and day 7 for plate 2. However, no difference
was observed between the two plates. Stimulation duration (days) was generally
performed for around 7 days during this study, when not inhibited by complete
cell death across the experiment. While stimulation duration (days) is another
variable which differs between studies, the most common duration is 7 days
(Table 1).

This study was plagued by issues, both related and unrelated to the
stimulation experiments and infrastructure. The issue of cells peeling off the
bottom of the well prevented successful analysis by immunofluorescent staining
for indicators of muscle cell maturation. This issue was addressed in Q4
experiments, which established Laminin and Geltain as culturewear coatings
that prevented peeling and allowed for greater growth of 2D cell culture. The
mysterious complete cell death issue which interrupted Test 3 was experienced
in other experiments during Q3 2021 and was investigated in Q4. It was
established in that investigation that DOLLY-12 cells in E6 differentiation
media suffered the greatest cell loss compared to other conditions tested,
indicating this was the reason for the complete cell death experienced during
this study. It should be noted that no cell death was observed in this study
due to electrical stimulation, however there is still uncertainty around
whether the cells experienced any stimulation at all. The response of the
waveform on the oscilloscope (Figure 2a) to the submersion of the electrodes
in the media well (Figure 2c; see the Q3 stimulation infrastructure report)
was relied on to indicate that current was passing through the media, however
no visible cell contractions or other indications were observed when
stimulation was performed, other than the results from Test 1, which were not
repeatable. This oscilloscope setup also did not inform the user if all wells
on each channel had current passing through, since they were connected in
parallel. As long as one well per channel had current flowing through, this
would change the waveform on the oscilloscope. However, this setup did allow
the user to detect when entire the channel was disconnected or the stimulator
was accidentally switched off, which occurred at multiple points during
testing and made the data of this study even less robust. The electrode board
had regular issues with the connection between the interconnects and
electrodes (Figure 2c), and this became worse towards the end of this study,
due to regular wear and tear. The automatic feedback from the StimJim was
useful, since it accurately indicated the actual voltage drop across the well
and allowed for a better understanding of what voltage the cells may have been
experiencing. The stimulator automatic feedback was validated during the
initial setup by manually measuring the response of the waveform on the
oscilloscope (see the Q3 stimulation infrastructure report).  

 Table 1: Literature review summary of electrical stimulation parameters and
systems for muscle cells

CellsPulse Frequency  
(Hz)  
Pulse Width (ms)  
No. of Sequential Pulses  
Waveform  
Pulse Intensity  
Pulse Train Duration (s)  
Recovery Between Pulse Trains (s)  
Start Stimulation (Day of differentiation)  
Stimulation Duration  
 (Hrs/Day)  
Stimulation Duration (Days)  
Electrode Type  
Stimulator  

Outcome

Source  
  
2D Primary Myoblast (Wistar Rat)15, 40, 10042Biphasic4-8 mA0.251, 4,
100N/A2420Rectangular Platinum Sheet  
(15 mm x 3 mm)S88 Grass InstrumentsImproved maturationNaumann and Pette, 1994  
3D C2C12 Myoblasts  
401.21Monophasic80 V/cm2120N/AN/AN/APLatinum Wire (0.127 mm diameter)DC -300A
Amplifier + NI LabView software  
ContractionBorschel et al., 2002  
  
3D Primary Myoblast (C57BL/6J Mouse)

0.033

3

1

Monophasic

0.07 V/cm

Continuous

None

3

24

4

Rectangular Stainless Steel Sheet  
(10mm x 8 mm)NI 6035E I/O terminal + NI LabView software  

Improved mygenic potential

Serena et al., 2008  
  
2D C2C12 Myoblasts

10

0.3

4

Polyphasic

N/A

0.4

3.6

5

24

7

U Shaped Stainless Steel WireCustom Reprogrammable Stimulation Circuit  

Maturation

Donnelly et al., 2010  
  
3D C2C12 Myoblasts

10

0.1

4

Polyphasic

N/A

0.4

3.6

5

24

7

U Shaped Stainless Steel Wire  
Custom Reprogrammable Stimulation Circuit

Maturation

Donnelly et al., 2010  
  
3D C2C12 Myoblasts

2

6

2

N/A

4 V/cm

Continuous

None

1

24

7

Rectangular Porous Carbon (Ionoptix C-Dish)IonOptix C-Pace

Differentiation / Contraction

van der Schaft et al., 2013  
  
2D Adipose-derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells (Sprague Dawley)

None

None

None

None

0.1 V/cm

None

None

 1

1

7

L Shaped Platinum Wire  
(1 mm dia, 21 mm + 29 mm)DC Power Supply

Differentiation

Mobini et al., 2016  
  
2D C2C12 Myoblasts

1

0.5

2

Biphasic

4 V/cm

Continuous

N/A

 4

12

1

Platinum WireIonOptix C-Pace

Contraction / Maturation

Banan Sadeghian et al., 2018  
  
2D C2C12 Myoblasts

None

None

None

Monophasic

2 V/cm

600

1200

 N/A

3

1

Aluminium Electrodes  
(With Agar Bridge)DC Power Supply (With Agar Bridge)

Alignment / Maturation

Ko et al.,  
 2018  
  
3D Human Primary Myoblasts

10

2 ms

2

Biphasic

70 mA

0.5

4.5

7

3 (7 hr rest after every hr of stimulation)

7

Carbon ElectrodesNI Labview Software

Maturation

Khodabukus et al., 2019  
  
3D Human Primary Myoblasts  
1, 2, 5, 20  
5  
1  
Monophasic  
20 mA  
N/A  
N/A  
N/A  
N/A  
N/A  
N/A  
Panlab / Harvard Apparatus Digital Stimulator  
Contraction  
Mills et al., 2019  
  
  
2D C2C12 Myoblasts

50

N/A

N/A

Biphasic

5 V/cm

N/A

NA

0

24

3

Straight Stainless Steel (304) Wire  
(0.5 mm dia)Arduino Uno R3

Alignment / Maturation

Shahin-Shamsabadi and Selvaganapathy, 2020  
  
2D Bovine Myocyte122Biphasic30 V/cmContinuousN/A32  
11Rectangular Porous Carbon (IonOptix C-Dish)  
IonOptix C-PaceContraction / Alignment / MaturationFuruhashi et al., 2021  
  
  
  


Limitations


The biggest limitation of this study is the lack of quantitative analysis
performed due to the cell death and cell peeling issues. There were also
multiple times when stimulation was disconnected accidentally or through
failure of the setup connection. For these reasons, the data obtained is not
considered robust. The data obtained in Test 1 was also not able to be
repeated and so is also not considered reliable.  
  
Many aspects of the stimulation infrastructure were not investigated, such as
the effect of the depth of the electrodes in the media and shape of the
electrodes. The lack of test points on the electrode board failed to provide
accurate data on the stimulation across each well and no impedance matching
was performed for the interconnects leading up to the electrodes.


Conclusion


Phase-contrast imaging of Test 1 results in this study indicated biphasic
electrical stimulation pulse trains (1.3 V/cm and 4 V/cm, 6 us pulse width, 2
Hz) increased cell mass and structure formation, compared to the control
wells, when using Vow's DOLLY-12 cell line. However, a repeat of this test did
not yield the same result, so this data is not considered reliable.
Immunofluorescent staining for MyoG and MF20 during this test was also not
successful, due to peeling of the cells from the base of the well during
fixing. Complete cell death caused by incompatibility of E6 media and DOLLY-12
cells impacted experiment progress. C2C12 contraction tests using electrical
stimulation with a variety of voltages did not induce any observable
contractions and a Bradford test of stimulated C2C12 cells did not demonstrate
any difference between the stimulated and control cells, with regard to
improved maturation.


Future Directions


To investigate the effects of work-rest ratios, it is recommended that future
studies use the Pulse Pal stimulator, as discussed in a previous report on the
electrical stimulation setup used in this study. It is recommended to automate
and scale out the electrical stimulation testing process to determine the
right waveform parameters as fast as possible for the many different cell
types Vow will be working with in the future. This will require new
stimulation infrastructure starting with at least 10x more channels, as well
as automated culture feeding and imaging. Summary data of electrical
stimulation systems used in previous literature (Table 1) established in this
report may be used as a starting point for future infrastructure design and
parameter development. Design of experiments (DOE) methodology may be
considered to assist managing the many different variables which may influence
cell growth in electrical stimulation studies. Future studies should also
consider automating aspects of contractile testing, so that a variety of
parameters can be tested in a short period of time and the cell reactions
analysed to determine contraction response. Further work is also required to
streamline and quantify the analysis of maturation with less time investment.
Automated Bradford assays may provide a good starting point for faster
quantification of improved muscle cell maturation. Traditional science
techniques typically take too long to scale this testing at Vow in a manner
which will provide answers fast enough, however they can form the basic
scientific testing methodology for our automated systems.

  


References


Banan Sadeghian, R., Ebrahimi, M. and Salehi, S., 2018. Electrical stimulation
of microengineered skeletal muscle tissue: Effect of stimulus parameters on
myotube contractility and maturation. Journal of tissue engineering and
regenerative medicine, 12(4), pp.912-922.

Borschel, G.H., Dennis, R.G. and Kuzon Jr, W.M., 2004. Contractile skeletal
muscle tissue-engineered on an acellular scaffold. Plastic and reconstructive
surgery, 113(2), pp.595-602.

Bryant, M.T., Degala, H.L., Mahapatra, A.K., Gosukonda, R.M. and Kannan, G.,
2021. Inactivation of Escherichia coli K12 by pulsed UV light on goat meat and
beef: microbial responses and modelling. International Journal of Food Science
& Technology, 56(2), pp.563-572.

Castro, N., Ribeiro, S., Fernandes, M.M., Ribeiro, C., Cardoso, V., Correia,
V., Minguez, R. and Lanceros‐Mendez, S., 2020. Physically active bioreactors
for tissue engineering applications. Advanced Biosystems, 4(10), p.2000125.

Cogan, S.F., 2008. Neural stimulation and recording electrodes. Annu. Rev.
Biomed. Eng., 10, pp.275-309.

Donnelly, K., Khodabukus, A., Philp, A., Deldicque, L., Dennis, R.G. and Baar,
K., 2010. A novel bioreactor for stimulating skeletal muscle in vitro. Tissue
Engineering Part C: Methods, 16(4), pp.711-718.

Furuhashi, M., Morimoto, Y., Shima, A., Nakamura, F., Ishikawa, H. and
Takeuchi, S., 2021. Formation of contractile 3D bovine muscle tissue for
construction of millimetre-thick cultured steak. npj Science of Food, 5(1),
pp.1-8.  

Geddes, L.A. and Roeder, R., 2003. Criteria for the selection of materials for
implanted electrodes. Annals of biomedical engineering, 31(7), pp.879-890.

Khodabukus, A., Madden, L., Prabhu, N.K., Koves, T.R., Jackman, C.P., Muoio,
D.M. and Bursac, N., 2019. Electrical stimulation increases hypertrophy and
metabolic flux in tissue-engineered human skeletal muscle. Biomaterials, 198,
pp.259-269.

Ko, U.H., Park, S., Bang, H., Kim, M., Shin, H. and Shin, J.H., 2018.
Promotion of myogenic maturation by timely application of electric field along
the topographical alignment. Tissue Engineering Part A, 24(9-10), pp.752-760.

Merrill, D.R., Bikson, M. and Jefferys, J.G., 2005. Electrical stimulation of
excitable tissue: design of efficacious and safe protocols. Journal of
neuroscience methods, 141(2), pp.171-198.

Mills, R.J., Parker, B.L., Monnot, P., Needham, E.J., Vivien, C.J., Ferguson,
C., Parton, R.G., James, D.E., Porrello, E.R. and Hudson, J.E., 2019.
Development of a human skeletal micro muscle platform with pacing
capabilities. Biomaterials, 198, pp.217-227.

Mobini, S., Leppik, L. and Barker, J.H., 2016. Direct current electrical
stimulation chamber for treating cells in vitro. Biotechniques, 60(2),
pp.95-98.

Naumann, K. and Pette, D., 1994. Effects of chronic stimulation with different
impulse patterns on the expression of myosin isoforms in rat myotube cultures.
Differentiation, 55(3), pp.203-211.

Serena, E., Flaibani, M., Carnio, S., Boldrin, L., Vitiello, L., De Coppi, P.
and Elvassore, N., 2008. Electrophysiologic stimulation improves myogenic
potential of muscle precursor cells grown in a 3D collagen scaffold.
Neurological research, 30(2), pp.207-214.

Shahin-Shamsabadi, A. and Selvaganapathy, P.R., 2020. Tissue-in-a-Tube: three-
dimensional in vitro tissue constructs with integrated multimodal
environmental stimulation. Materials Today Bio, 7, p.100070.

van der Schaft, D.W., van Spreeuwel, A.C., Boonen, K.J., Langelaan, M.L.,
Bouten, C.V. and Baaijens, F.P., 2013. Engineering skeletal muscle tissues
from murine myoblast progenitor cells and application of electrical
stimulation. Journal of visualized experiments: JoVE, (73).

  


