

Method summary

DOLLY12 fibroblasts in 384 well plate were passaged to a 96 well plate in
different conditions (Figure 1). 4 replicates were used for each condition.
For the first set of conditions (wells on the left in the image), PBS, tryple
and growth media were warmed to 37 degrees. Also, after cells were transferred
to 96 well plates, they were pipetted up and down in the growth media. For the
second set of conditions (wells on the right in the image), reagents were not
warmed. Also, after cells were transferred to 96 well plates, they were not
pipetted up and down in the growth media as this would be a closer reflection
of the OT2 protocol we've designed. However, for the 20 min time point a
control was included (row B) which involved mixing in the final step. Although
it wasn't ideal that I changed two factors (temperature and mixing), it was to
make a better comparison between manual protocol vs OT2 protocol (performed
manually). Cells for all conditions were tryplised at room temperature (i.e.
they were not placed in the incubator during the tryple incubation).

24 h after passaging, all wells received a 50% feed and on day 4 after
passaging, cells were stained with Hoechst. One image of the centre of each
well was captured on 5x on the Zaber. Images were then processed through MIA
('DAPI count') to obtain cell counts per region of interest (ROI).
Visualisation and statistical analysis was performed on GraphPad Prism.

  

Figure 1. Plate map of cell counts from 96 wp. Green + bold represents
conditions that involved mixing in the final step whereas conditions in yellow
did not involve mixing in the final step.






Results

  

Brown-Forsythe and Welch ANOVA test revealed no significant difference between
the 3 different tryple conditions that were tested when tryplising for 20
minutes.

  

  

  

  

An ordinary two-way ANOVA showed no significant difference between warm vs
room temperature reagents at each time point. Also, there was no significant
difference if we compare between time points within the same temperature.

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  


