

Key Findings

  1. Fibroblasts clustered and formed clumps in hanging drops. Lower concentrations of cells in growth medium reduced the incidence of clustering.
  2. An agarose coating (1% w/v) prevented fibroblasts from adhering to plasticware. However after 48H in cell culture conditions (5% CO2, 37'C) the agarose coating began to detach and degrade in the growth medium.
  3. Poloxamer 407 (0.1% w/v) in growth medium did not prevent fibroblasts from adhering to plasticware. 
  4. No viable fibroblasts were observed 48H after hanging drops were seeded into 5 mL of agitated suspension culture. 




Discussion

When cells are grown in agitated suspension culture, they are exposed to a
significant amount of turbulent shear stress as a result of shaking, stirring
and/or sparging. High levels of shear stress, such as those present in a
bioreactor, can be harmful to mammalian cells, and can result in decreased
viability and cell death. When transferring cells from adherent to suspension
culture, it is therefore important to consider how the cells will react to the
sudden increase in shear stress. One approach to reduce this shock is to adapt
cells to suspension in a static culture, and once adapted, add agitation. In
this experiment, we attempted three different methods of static suspension
adaptation with fibroblasts: hanging drops, agarose-coated plasticware, and
poloxamer-407 supplemented growth medium.

Fibroblasts were seeded into 10 uL droplets on the underside of 60 mm culture
plate (Figure 1). In the first attempt, all droplets were seeded with 100,000
cells/mL. Cells were examined immediately after seeding and then again 24H
after seeding under phase microscopy. Initially, cells formed an even, single
cell suspension (Figure 2). However, after 24H, large clumps were observed
(Figure 3), and Trypan-blue staining revealed that there were in fact no
viable cells remaining in the droplets (Figure 4). The cultures were then
discarded.

Figure 1. 10 uL hanging drops seeded with cells

 Figure 2. Phase, 10X. Cells formed even cell suspension in hanging drop
sample 0H post seeding.



 Figure 3. Phase, 10X. Cell clumps observed in hanging drop sample 24H post
seeding.





Figure 4. Phase, 10X. Cells stained with trypan blue showed no remaining
viable cells.  

In the second trial, droplets were seeded using a serial dilution of cell
suspension in an attempt to minimise clumping. Cell densities used included
100,000, 50,000, 25,000 and 12,500 cells/mL. Larger cell clumps were observed
in 100K cells/mL and 50K cells/mL than in 25K cells/mL and 12.5K cells/mL cell
suspensions (Figures 5 & 6).



Figure 5. Phase, 10X. Cells in hanging drop seeded at 100K cells/mL



  Figure 6. Phase, 10X. Cells in hanging drop seeded at 12.5K cells/mL

After 48H in hanging drops, droplets were combined and seeded into 5 mL of
growth medium in 1 x 50 mL shake tube. After 48H in agitated suspension, a
sample was taken and observed under phase microscopy. No cells were present,
so the culture was discarded.

Fibroblasts remaining in the thawed vial were seeded into two flasks; one
coated with agarose and one with poloxamer 407 added to the growth medium. A
1% agarose solution was chosen based on positive results seen at this
concentration in the literuature (Juniartha et al. 2012). A 0.1% concentration
of poloxamer was used; Sigma Aldrich (the poloxamer supplier) reported that
they test Pluronic F-127 (poloxamer 407) in cell culture at 0.1 g/100 mL
medium (see FAQ here).

As expected, cells did not adhere to the agarose-coated flask. However after
48H in culture the agarose began to lift from the culture plastic and degrade
in the medium (Figure 7). The 0.1% poloxamer added to the medium of the second
flask did not successfully inhibit fibroblast adhesion to plasticware. (Figure
8). These cultures were therefore both discarded.

Figure 7. Agarose coating lifted from the base of the flask after 48H in cell
culture conditions.

Figure 8. Phase, 10X. Fibroblasts still adhered to plasticware with 0.1%
poloxamer in growth medium.  






Limitations

  1. No replicates for static culture flasks 
  2. Did not test different concentrations of agarose or poloxamer 
  3. Difficult to assess cell viability while seeded in hanging drops, so could not conclude whether cells died before or after being seeded into agitated suspension culture 




Conclusion

Seeding cells into hanging drops does not appear to be fit for our purpose of
adapting cells to suspension due to their propensity to form clusters, likely
resulting in cell death.  

Coating culture flasks with 1% agaorse and adding 0.1% poloxamer to growth
medium were unsuccessful at enabling cells to grow in static suspension.




Future Directions

Different concentrations of poloxamer and agarose could be tested in the
future if we want to re-examine static suspension adaptation. For example,
Friedrich et al (2009) successfully used a 1.5% (w/v) concentration of Agarose
to coat plates. We could also try passaging fibroblasts into a freshly-coated
flask before the agarose separates from the plasticware, until the cells are
adapted to growing in suspension.

Overall, hanging drops do not appear to be an appropriate method for adapting
cells to suspension culture. In each iteration, we have observed significant
cell clumping unless droplets are seeded at very low densities (25,000 and
12,500 cells/mL). Given that medium changes cannot be performed on the
droplets, they need to be passaged within 48H into a higher-volume suspension
culture. In order to achieve our desired seeding densities of ~1M cells/mL, we
would therefore require more than 120 droplets to seed our lowest volume
suspension vessel (deep-well plates - 3M cells), especially when accounting
for the high rate of cell death seen within the first 24H of seeding into
suspension culture. This is very time-consuming, and given the lack of success
seen so far, I would not recommend this method for suspension adaptation.




References

  1. Juniartha, P., Indra, M., Sujuti, H., & Lyrawati., D, 2012. Agarose Coated Culture Plate in Tumosphere Culture of Cervical Cancer Cell Line HeLa: an Alternative to Non Adhesive Culture Plate. Journal of Tropical Life Science. 6(3): 196-204. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/313087042_Agarose_Coated_Culture_Plate_in_Tumorsphere_Culture_of_Cervical_Cancer_Cell_Line_HeLa_an_Alternative_to_Non_Adhesive_Culture_Plate
  2. Friedrich, J., Seidel, C., Ebner, R., & Kunz-Schughart, L 2009. Spheroid-based drug screen: considerations and practical approach. Nature. https://www.nature.com/articles/nprot.2008.226


