

Performed by: LL




Preparation of methylcellulose stock solution:

Since the in-house MC is non sterile it will need to be filtered prior to use
in any cell culture experiments. MC can be dissolved using cold water, however
preparing a solution of MC with cold water is difficult because as the powder
comes into contact with water, a gel layer forms around it, dramatically
slowing the diffusion of water into the powder, hence, the inside remains dry.
A more appropriate way is to first mix the powder with hot water, so that the
MC particles are well dispersed (consequently have a higher surface area), in
the water and cool down this dispersion while stirring, should ultimately lead
to more rapid dissolution of the MC particles.

  1. Heat up 50 mL of ultrapure MilliQ water to 80°C . Add 5 g MC powder (for 10% w/v solution) and agitate until particles are evenly dispersed - with vigorous shaking. A white precipitate should form on surface of the liquid. Heating timestamp: 13:37 - 13:57  
  

  2. Immerse the vessel containing the MC into room temperature tap water for 5-10 minutes shaking and swirling the vessel intermittently until the solution becomes clear and contains no visible solids. 13:58 -  
  

  3. Pass through a 0.22 µm to sterilise the solution. Prepared solution may be aliquoted and stored at 4°C for up to 12 months. MC serves as a non-cytotoxic, inert, suspending agent to enhance cell-cell adhesion and discourage the formation of an adherent cell monolayer.   
  

If it is not possible to sterile filter the 10% (w/v) MC solution it can
potentially be autoclaved. Prepare the MC as described in option 1, however
once dissolved store the solution at 4°C overnight to equilibrate. Sterilise
the solution by autoclaving it at 121°C for 30 minutes.




Observations/Summary:

\- MC appeared to dissolve in the MilliQ water when heated up to 80°C and
cooled rapidly in room temperature water.

\- MC solution was extremely bubbly due to the vigorous shaking and was
thick/viscous and could not be sterile filtered through a 0.22 um filter.

\- MC solution was left in a 4°C fridge overnight to reduce the formation of
bubbles and equilibrate before being autoclaved.

  


