

Background

At Vow, we have typically seen mammalian, and chicken adherent cells attach to
culture plastic within 24hrs of plating from homogenate. During our initial
culture of CHOMP homogenate, we found that the adherent cell population took
>6 days to attach to culture plastic. See lab book here:https://au-
mynotebook.labarchives.com/share/Vow%2520-%2520Team%2520Science/NDE4Ny4zfDEwNjMxNy8zMjIxLTI0NzI0L1RyZWVOb2RlLzc4ODA3OTIzNXwxMDYyOS4z.
After thawing a vial of frozen homogenate, cell attachment was not observed
until 12 days post-thaw. See lab book here :https://au-
mynotebook.labarchives.com/share/Vow%2520-%2520Team%2520Science/NDU2Ni45MDAwMDAwMDAwMDF8MTA2MzE3LzM1MTMtMjgzNTcvVHJlZU5vZGUvNTg5OTk4MzM3fDExNTkyLjk=

This indicates that unattached CHOMP cells were able to survive suspended in
static culture for at least 12 days and is a promising indicator that these
cells may be more suited to suspension culture than mammalian cells.
Interestingly, after their first passage, CHOMP adherent cells attached to the
plate within 24hours suggesting that this delayed adherence may only occur
when cells are attaching from crude homogenate rather than form established
cell culture after a passage. We would like to perform a pilot study to
investigate the potential for CHOMP cells to be cultured in suspension-based
systems. To do this, it would be beneficial to attempt suspension cell
adaptation using cultured CHOMP fibroblasts as well as with raw homogenate.

As CHOMP cells appear slow to attach to culture plastic, daily pipetting to
disturb cells may sufficient to prevent cell attachment. This semi-static
approach should be trialled alongside traditional shaker culture for
suspension cell adaption.

DMEM + 20% FBS + 1x P/S has been shown to support fibroblast proliferation in
adherent culture (see lab book previously mentioned). For this reason, this
media should provide a suitable starting point for our 1st CHOMP suspension
trial.  
  
During this study we aim to determine if CHOMP cells have improved cell
viability and proliferative capacity in suspension culture compared to our
previous mammalian suspension cell culture trials. We also aim to assess if
culturing cells straight from homogenate rather than pre-cultured populations
will confer an adaptive advantage in suspension culture.


