

## Completed by: AK




In addition to generating a suspension adapted fibroblast cell line, another
focus during this quarter for project pool party also involves developing a
pipeline to perform single cell cloning (SCC) of adapted cells. SCC involves
isolating a single cell of interest to generate a homogenous population
genetically identical to the parent cell [1]. Previous experiments have
optimised the SCC pipeline to perform for adherent cultures, leveraging the
liquid handling Opentrons robots [2]. In order to quantify top performing
clones, an in-house developed machine learning (ML) model can automatically
"count" Zaber imaged wells and identify the presence of cells. However this
model was initially developed for muscle stem cells (MuSC) that grow adhered
to a plastic culture surface, with a new model being required to identity
cells grow in suspension culture conditions. This is predominantly due to the
differences in morphology between suspension and adherent cells, with cells in
suspension exhibiting a much more circular morphology compared to splayed out
flat adherent cells. Prior to this it is first necessary to generate data
approximating cells in suspension to re-train to current ML model to identify
populations of such cells. In addition an alternative route can involve using
an image processing software called FIJI, to generate a macro that can
automatically identify cells as a region of interest and output a total cell
count from a particular image. Therefore the focus of this experiment will
involve generating phase contrast images of freshly thawed fibroblast cells in
suspension in 384-well plates prior to them adhering to the culture-ware
surface.

  

References:

[1] Longo, P.A., Kavran, J.M., Kim, M.S. and Leahy, D.J., 2014. Single cell
cloning of a stable mammalian cell line. Methods Enzymol, 536, pp.165-172.

[2] https://au-
mynotebook.labarchives.com/share/Vow%2520-%2520Team%2520Science/MzY2Ni4wfDEwNjMxNy8yODIwL1RyZWVOb2RlLzIzODA2NDAyMTZ8OTMwNi4w


