Key findings:


  * Training set of images (from 384 well plate) were successfully generated of DOLLY12 fibroblasts approximating the morphology and size of suspension cells
  * ML model can identify cells in both low and high density images, however requires additional optimisation for images with a sufficiently high number of cells (>1000)
  * ML model overcounts images from Day 1 post FACS sort, likely due to condensation and/or debris appearing similar to cells the model was trained from


Results/Discussion:


The purpose of this experiment was to generate phase contrast and DAPI images
of DOLLY12 fibroblasts in suspension in order to train a machine learning (ML)
model to identify cells in suspension from captured Zaber images.
Unfortunately, no suspension adapted fibroblast cell lines have been
successfully obtained, therefore freshly thawed DOLLY12 fibroblasts were
utilised to generate "suspension-like" images for training. Wherein,
fibroblasts that have been recently thawed and have not adhered onto a culture
surface approximate the morphology (roundness, not splayed out/attached) of
commercial suspension cell lines. These images could then be utilised to train
a ML model to identify and count cells during the cloning of suspension
adapted cells.

Initial attempts highlighted that the early iteration of the ML model could
successfully identify cells from phase contrast images to an acceptable degree
(±10% threshold). Figure 1 highlights the comparison between Hoechst stained
fibroblasts imaged on the DAPI channel, which was used to evaluate performance
of ML model, and the corresponding phase contrast image. Overlays between the
two images accentuates that the labelled cells from the phase contrast image
correspond accurately to the stained nuclei. However this ±10% threshold was
only retained in sparse populations of cells, as emphasised in Figure 2. In
denser populations the ML significantly undercounted the number of cells
present in the well, which was attributed to how close the cells were in
proximity to one another. Following this initial training session the ML model
was then implemented in the suspension cloning pipeline. However, as indicated
in Figure 3, the ML model was overcounting wells from Day 1 plates post FACS
sorting. Wherein, at Day 1 ideally there should one be one cell present in the
well, given that only one cell is sorted per well, whereas the ML model
identified >15 "cells". As a result, it's use was discontinued until the model
could be trained to eliminate false positive (i.e., debris that approximated
the morphology and size of cells) and count actual cells more accurately. In a
separate note the model was further refined to count cells from wells with
sufficiently high density. Figure 4 illustrates a phase contrast image of a
well from a 384 well plate in which the suspended fibroblast cells have been
labelled using the ML model. Importantly, and as expected, the model was able
to identify significantly more cells compared to the iteration highlighted
from figure 2. However the model still overlooks a number of cells and thus
requires further optimisation, preferably with a either a commercial or in
house adapted suspension cell line.

  

(a)
(b)

Figure 1: Comparison between labelled and unlabelled DOLLY12 fibroblast nuclei
in sparse population in 384 well plate using a machine learning model trained
using fibroblasts cells in suspension culture. (a) DAPI image of unlabelled
fibroblasts stained with Hoechst in a well of a 384 well plate. (b) Phase
contrast image of labelled fibroblasts using a suspension trained machine
learning model in same well of a 384 well plate.  Cells imaged under DAPI
fluorescence channel, with 5x objective using the Zaber.

  

(a)
(b)

Figure 2: Comparison between labelled and unlabelled DOLLY12 fibroblast nuclei
in dense population in 384 well plate using a machine learning model trained
using fibroblasts cells in suspension culture. (a) DAPI image of unlabelled
fibroblasts stained with Hoechst in a well of a 384 well plate. (b) Phase
contrast image of labelled fibroblasts using a suspension trained machine
learning model in same well of a 384 well plate. Cells imaged under DAPI
fluorescence channel, with 5x objective using the Zaber.

                                                        

Figure 3: Phase contrast image of DOLLY12 fibroblast in suspension, labelled
using the ML model Day 1 post FACS sort.




Figure 4: Phase contrast image of dense DOLLY12 fibroblast population in
suspension, labelled using the ML model.  


Limitations:


A fundamental limitation concerning this experiment was that the images
utilised to train the ML model were not suspension adapted cells. Wherein, due
to the lack of an in-house suspension adapted cell line or commercially
available equivalent the training set of images were obtained using a method
that may be inappropriate to train a ML model. Additionally the freshly thawed
fibroblast cells may not approximate cells that have already been adapted to
suspension when imaged from static culture. Separately, the ML model
unfortunately could not identify cell to an accurate degree from actual
cloning plates, and thus could not be utilised during the cloning process.
However, this may be attributed to the finding that even human observers have
substantial difficulty in identifying cells from the cloning plates.  


Conclusion:


Despite promising indications that the ML model could identify suspension-like
cells, further optimisation is required. Namely the model overcounts images
from early stages of the cloning process, given that only a few cells are
expected to be present. Moreover, dense cell populations are undercounted due
to the close proximity of cells to one another. Further work should involve
utilising CHO-S cells to train the model further.


Future Directions:


  * Generate training images using suspension adapted cell lines, namely CHO-S cells. An MCB of these cells has been established and therefore can be utilised for the continuation of this experiment
  * Continue refining the model using a training set of images of CHO-S cells in static suspension imaged on the Zaber


