

KR3: Investigate the (nutritional/culinary) benefits of mature muscle

Phase one:

Related milestone: 0.25 Identify factors (metabolites, vitamins, minerals,
proteins etc.) present in mature muscle

  1. High level research on components and nutrients in muscle/ meat/ myoblast that are of interest to product
    * NUTRITION TABLE 
  2. Select 3 - 5 components for further in-depth research, analysis and planning
    1. Focus heavily on analysis and how to bring this in-house or outsource      

  

Phase two:

Related milestone: 0.5 Source and Implement suitable assays (identify assay
and send a sample) + 0.75 Measure baseline of factors in mature muscle vs
myoblasts

  1. Perform cell expansion on one cell line to generate myoblast and differentiated cells for: 
    1. 1mg for proteomics and 10 mg for lipidomic 
    2. seed 2 x 24 wp at 1000 and 7000 cells/cm2 for BCA  
      1. Send samples for analysis 
    3. Analysis of high reward components identified in research stages. 
      1. Will need to have analysis method with designed and planned (previous lit research stages)

  

Phase three:

Related milestone: 1.0 Measure baseline of factors in difference cell
types/lines (myo vs fibro or DOLLY vs CHOMP)

  1. Repeat with other cell lines eg DOLLY, BUFFY, NANDO, CROC, WALLY, GOBLR, KUZCO etc 

  

  

Requirements

  * Incubator space 
  * Microscope to check 10CF flask 

  

Questions

  * How many cells is needed to generate 1g samples - for both myoblast and differentiated cells? 
  * How long to leave cells in cell factory for it to differentiate 
  * What are our dry and wet stock requirements? - to update Gabby 

  

Some things we are hoping to answer from out studies:

  * What are some key compounds we should include in our product (eg in its media, added etc) 
  * What are some key beneficial compounds that our cells contains 
  * Difference between myoblast and differentiated cells? 
  * Difference between cell lines or other cell type? 

  

  

  

  


