

Key Results  
1\. A total of 20 vials of CHOMP crude homogenate were banked across 5
biopsies.  
2\. We were not successful in establish an adherent population from our
outgrowth culture.  
3\. No samples were preserved for proteomics/genomics.  
4\. A sample was cryopreserved in OCT for future histological examination.  

Discussion  
These biopsies were process following Vows standard protocol for the isolation
of cells from mammalian tissue. It is yet to be seen if this method is
appropriate for use with reptilian cells.

Limitations  
We were not able to establish a culture of adherent cells from our dermal
outgrowth culture. A review summarising existing literature on successful
reptilian dermal outgrowth culture should be performed in order to determine
if conditions could be improved for future attempts.  

There was confusion around the protocol for the cryopreservation of tissue for
proteomics and genomics, and samples were therefore not cryopreserved.

Conclusions  
Biopsies were successfully collected from the crocodile limbs and were
processed into crude homogenate. This homogenate will need to be thawed and
cultured in order to determine the success of the isolation protocol and the
viability of these cells.  

Future Directions  
In order to determine if these cell isolations were successful in terms of
cell viability in culture, crude homogenate will need to be thawed and
cultured. See here: https://au-
mynotebook.labarchives.com/share/Vow%2520-%2520Team%2520Science/Mzc4My4wfDEwNjMxNy8yOTEwLTIyMDAxL1RyZWVOb2RlLzQxNjQyMjU0NjZ8OTYwMy4w.
In future is may also be beneficial to culture a portion of the homogenate
immediately post isolation, circumventing the initial homogenate freeze. Cells
seeded from fresh rather than frozen/thawed isolate may be in better shape and
perform better in culture.  
  
We may aim to repeat outgrowth culture in future, in order to obtain a
population of dermal cells. Media and culture conditions for reptilian dermal
outgrowths should be optimised following established protocols within
published literature.  

There was confusion around the protocol for the cryopreservation of tissue for
proteomics and genomics. Unambiguous procedures and an SOP for tissue
cryopreservation should therefore be prepared to avoid this shortfall in
future.

  


