Introduction


Although preliminary estim studies with sheep myoblasts appeared to promote
the formation of mature muscle, subsequent studies were unable to replicate
these findings due to unexpected cell death experienced while culturing
primary cells - an issue which is being troubleshooted separately.
Additionally, since the process of growing up primary cell lines is a time
consuming process (mainly because the cells take longer to proliferate and
mature), the team opted to continue the estim experiments using C2C12 cells,
which are an immortalised mouse myoblast cell line that proliferates and
matures rapidly. However, during the process of differentiating these cells,
severe delamination from the TC-treated polystyrene wells was observed, with
mature C2C12s forming sheets / clumps / balls that had the chance of being
aspirated during the washing steps involved in primary and secondary staining.

In our preceding study, we successfully resolved the delamination issue using
a Gelatin or Laminin cultureware coat, enabling us to move on to testing the
effect of certain electrical stimulation patterns on myblast behaviour
(alignment of myotubes,myogenic potential) and maturation (increased protein
expression), as reported in multiple scientific studies [1-10].

  

References:

1\. Cogan, S.F., 2008. Neural stimulation and recording electrodes. Annu. Rev.
Biomed. Eng., 10, pp.275-309.2\. Donnelly, K., Khodabukus, A., Philp, A.,
Deldicque, L., Dennis, R.G. and Baar, K., 2010. A novel bioreactor for
stimulating skeletal muscle in vitro. Tissue Engineering Part C: Methods,
16(4), pp.711-718.3\. Geddes, L.A. and Roeder, R., 2003. Criteria for the
selection of materials for implanted electrodes. Annals of biomedical
engineering, 31(7), pp.879-890.4\. Hyun Ko, U.H., Park, S., Bang, H., Kim, M.,
Shin, H. and Shin, J.H., 2018. Promotion of myogenic maturation by timely
application of electric field along the topographical alignment. Tissue
Engineering Part A, 24(9-10), pp.752-760.5\. Merrill, D.R., Bikson, M. and
Jefferys, J.G., 2005. Electrical stimulation of excitable tissue: design of
efficacious and safe protocols. Journal of neuroscience methods, 141(2),
pp.171-198.6\. Mobini, S., Leppik, L. and Barker, J.H., 2016. Direct current
electrical stimulation chamber for treating cells in vitro. Biotechniques,
60(2), pp.95-98.7\. Naumann, K. and Pette, D., 1994. Effects of chronic
stimulation with different impulse patterns on the expression of myosin
isoforms in rat myotube cultures. Differentiation, 55(3), pp.203-211.8\.
Serena, E., Flaibani, M., Carnio, S., Boldrin, L., Vitiello, L., De Coppi, P.
and Elvassore, N., 2008. Electrophysiologic stimulation improves myogenic
potential of muscle precursor cells grown in a 3D collagen scaffold.
Neurological research, 30(2), pp.207-214.9\. Shahin-Shamsabadi, A. and
Selvaganapathy, P.R., 2020. Tissue-in-a-Tube: three-dimensional in vitro
tissue constructs with integrated multimodal environmental stimulation.
Materials Today Bio, 7, p.100070.10\. van der Schaft, D.W., van Spreeuwel,
A.C., Boonen, K.J., Langelaan, M.L., Bouten, C.V. and Baaijens, F.P., 2013.
Engineering skeletal muscle tissues from murine myoblast progenitor cells and
application of electrical stimulation. Journal of visualized experiments:
JoVE, (73).


Summary


C2C12 cells were expanded and harvested, seeded into 12 well plates coated
with either Gelatin or Laminin. 3 replicates were seeded for each of 4
conditions per coating:

  1. Stimulation at ~5.4V max amplitude
  2. Stimulation at ~3.4V max amplitude
  3. electrode control, no voltage
  4. no electrode control (standard cell culture condition)

Both plates were treated with differentiation media for 2 days prior to
starting stimulation (see table below for detail). At conclusion of electrical
stimulation, 1 well per condition was harvested for total protein analysis and
the remaining replicates underwent fixing and IF staining as usual.

DayProcedure  
-2Precoat cultureware with Laminin and Gelatin (1 dish each) . Seed 2x 12WP control with 60k - 80k cells/well in DMEM/F12 + 20%FBS + 1XP/S growth media.  
-150% media change with growth media.  
0Switch to E6 differentiation media.  
1-2Daily 100% media change with E6 differentiation media.  
3Begin electrical stimulation. 100% media change with E6 differentiation
media.  
4-6Daily 100% media change with E6 differentiation media.  
7MyoG/MF20 Antibody Staining (2 wells), total protein analysis (1 well)  
  
  


Key Findings


  * No significant difference between stimulated and non-stimulated conditions in both the gelatin- and laminin-coated plates (see images)
  * No cell death observed due to electrical stimulation, though some cell loss occurred in wells A1, A2 & B1 of the gelatin-coated plate
  * The OT2 fix protocol was successfully implemented, with no significant delamination being observed
  * No significant delamination occurred post-stimulation during downstream analysis (primary and secondary staining), demonstrating the benefit of the cultureware precoating


  
Figure 1:  Representative areas from full-well immunstained Zaber images
comparing the maturity of stimulated C2C12 cultures (left to right = Laminin
5.4V, Gelatin 3.4V, Gelatin electrode control). Cell nuclei are stained using
DAPI (blue) and MyoG (green), intracellular myosin heavy chain (stained red)  


Discussion and Limitations
  
  
Discussion:

The Bradford total analysis data below confirm the results observed using
immunostaining, where no significant benefit could be produced by applying a
voltage to the cells during differentiation.

  
  
Figure 2: Total Protein values per well obtained using Bradford assay  
  
A possibly coincidental difference between Laminin and Gelatin precoatings is
that at Day4Diff (Day 2 e-stim) cells in some gelatin coated wells had
delaminated, which could have been due to rough handling during a previous
feed. This applies to Gelatin plate well A1, B1, A2.

All immunostaining (excepts antibody addition) was performed on the opentrons
and both coating were stable during the washes and the entirety of the
process. Final images (Figure 1 above) show no major differences in myotube
maturity or MF20 expression.

  

Limitations:

  1. The current plate lid infrastructure is occasionally hard to connect with the electrical clamps and on at least one occasion cells went unstimulated overnight due to unreliable connection.
  2. Cell coverage was of variable uniformity across the replicates - while seeding, one of the wells on the laminin plate was left empty due to insufficient seeding solution
  3. Gelatin 6V condition was not assessed using immunostaining, since the only remaining well was used for Bradford analysis.
  4. insufficient replicates were assessed per condition due to the low throughput infrastructure available currently.

  


Conclusion


No significant difference was observed between stimulated and unstimulated
conditions.This might be due to suboptimal stimulation profiles chosen or the
start of e-stim at the wrong time in the maturation cycle


Future Directions


  1. Future experiments should aim to seed cells lower and proliferate to only ~70% confluence before switching to E6 media. The proliferation stage could be extended to 2 days to allow for ECM generation and improve the likelihood of success
  2. start of e-stim for C2C12 cells might have to be earlier due to their faster maturation cycle (on Day 1 of Diff?)
  3. A next generation e-stim lid infrastructure is desirable to increase throughput and enable statistical analysis of the conditions studies

  


