  
  
The following is an excerpt from the experiment template

While it is hard to be prescriptive with what a report should contain, there
are a few common points that all reports should consider. A report should
(almost) replicate the "Discussion" section of a journal article. The
following is a ROUGH guide with a suggested paragraph structure. PLEASE ensure
to include references to previously published work (or links to work conducted
here at Vow).

  1. What is the most important overarching finding? 
  2. A brief discussion of all results and how they fit into our final goal of producing an edible meat product (this section might be several paragraphs long and should put the results into the context of what has been done before). 
  3. Any limitations of the study, why might our results not be correct? 
  4. What is the overall conclusion? 
  5. Discussion of future directions.

***PLEASE NOTE, YOUR REPORT SHOULD BE FINALISED WITHIN TWO WEEKS OF COMPLETING
ALL EXPERIMENTAL WORK.***  




Report

Key Results  
1\. Cells were cultured for 13 days before the first adherent cells were
observed.  
2. The culture was terminated after 34 days (and 2 passages), due to unexpected/unexplained cell death. 

Results and Discussion  
We did not see cells adhered to the vessel until 13 days in culture. This is
significantly longer than our mammalian cells which typically adhere to
culture plastic within 24 hours post-thaw. When CHOMP cells were cultured from
fresh (rather than frozen isolate), the time between seeding and the emergence
of an adherent cell population ranged from 6-8 days, depending on the cell
line (see lab book here: https://au-
mynotebook.labarchives.com/share/Vow%2520-%2520Team%2520Science/NDE4Ny4zfDEwNjMxNy8zMjIxLTI0NzI0L1RyZWVOb2RlLzc4ODA3OTIzNXwxMDYyOS4z).  
  
This culture was terminated after 34 days due to the failure of cells to re-
attach to the culture vessel following their second passage on day 27. It is
unclear why these cells suddenly died as there was no signs of contamination
and the cells had been passaged following standard protocols. The doubling
time of 2.59 days between the first and second passage also indicated
relatively healthy and proliferative cell population, and cells had re-
attached to the vessel within 24hrs of their 1st passage. The most probable
causes for this cell loss include undetected changes in the incubator
temperature, humidity or CO2 levels, possible micro plasma contamination, or
expired media reagents such as FBS. We have not observed cell death in either
our CHOMP09 or CHOMP07 cells, when cultured from fresh isolate (see lab book
mentioned above). It is also possible that the process of cryopreservation of
isolate had a negative impact on the  downstream viability of these CHOMP09
cells.

Here we saw that CHOMP09 cells cultured from frozen isolate were very slow to
attach to culture plastic, and died unexpectedly after the 2nd passage. Given
we did not see this in cells cultured directly from fresh isolate, it is
probable that the cells in isolate did not respond favourably to
cryopreservation.  

Limitations  
Due to the unexpected death of these cells, were were unable to expand them
into an MCB as planned.  

Conclusion  
Repeating this process will be necessary to determine if CHOMP frozen isolate
is can be cultured for longer periods.  We will also need to repeat this
process to generate an MCB of adherent CHOMP cells as planned. Alternatively,
the MCB can be derived from cells which were cultured directly from isolate,
without an intermediate cryopreservation step.

Future Direction  
Due to this unexplained cell failure, another vial of CHOMP homogenate should
be thawed, cultured and expanded in order to determine if the slow attachment
time and sudden cell death witnessed here was an anomaly, or if the
cryopreservation of CHOMP homogenate has unintended downstream affects on the
cell populations. It may beneficial to thaw CHOMP07 in addition to CHOMP09 as
it is possible that 1 cell line will perform better than the other in long
term culture.

  

  


