

LINK TO CLUBHOUSE EPIC PAGE:
https://app.clubhouse.io/vowfood/epic/21699/suspension-adaptation-6-hdacs-and-
hydrolysates?cf_workflow=500000005&ct_workflow=all

LINK TO AIRTABLE ENTRY PAGE:
https://airtable.com/tblg6twoOUgW08iLA/viwK5Elaw1pIYYJug/recT0PIHQpjtXk2CS?blocks=hide

RELATED TO MILESTONE:  Generating at least 1 suspension-adapted fibroblast
cell line which is >95% viable and proliferates for >14 days.

AIM/PURPOSE: To adapt fibroblasts to suspension culture

HYPOTHESIS: We hypothesise the inclusion of the p53 inhibitors histone
deacetylases 1 and 2 (HDAC1, HDAC2) and/or the inclusion of plant-based
hydrolysates will support the adaptation of fibroblasts to suspension culture.

RESULTS SUMMARY: See results and data analyses summary here

Results indicated that all treatment groups and controls exhibited a rapid
loss of cells during the suspension adaption process. Manual haemocytometer
counts with trypan blue exclusion confirmed that no conditions contained
viable cells at the Day 30 timepoint. This indicated that no fibroblast cells
were successfully adapted to suspension, irrespective of treatment condition,
thus refuting the proposed hypothesis. No significant differences in cell
survival and adaption between the p53 inhibitors (histone deacetylases 1 and
2) and plant-derived hydrolysates were observed across all conditions.  

CONCLUSIONS:

Despite not achieving suspension adapted cells in this experiment, we have
identified several shortcomings in our current methods such as live/dead
staining. Namely the limitation of inconsistent levels of fluorescence in
Zaber imaged cultures across multiple days made it difficult to quantify cell
numbers. Additionally the use of the Opentrons reservoirs resulted in
overestimated FIJI macro counts due to the presence of fluorescent debris that
approximated the size and circularity of cells and were thus indistinguishable
from suspension cells. Finally due to the lack of cell number data captured
between days 2 and 16, this resulted in difficulties extrapolating trends
across the culture conditions.

NEXT STEPS:

\- Discontinue use of Opentrons reservoirs from staining protocols due to
presence of fluorescent debris.

\- Continue optimising live/dead staining protocols to obtain consistent
florescent results. Namely trialing the levels of fluorescent signals of
different live and dead stains such as calcein, CMFDA, propidium iodide,
Hoechst 33342 Ready Flow and DAPI are potential avenues.

\- Evaluate the effect of hydrolysates in fibroblast adherent culture to
determine if they are practical supplements to include in future suspension
culture experiments (See here for continuation of this work).


