Quick summary of main findings


All cells experience significant cell loss between days 4-10 of
differentiation in E6 media (see Prism file for statistics and p values).
However, the cell loss seen in BUFFY6, DAISY4 and C2C12 cells in E6 is low
compared to the cell loss experienced in DOLLY12 cells in E6. DOLLY12 cells in
E6 media experience a much higher degree of cell loss between Day 4 - Day 10
compared to other cell lines.


Discussion


Cell loss has been witnessed repetitively throughout 2021 Q3, leading to a
full Cell Loss Investigation in 2021 Q4. DOLLY12 cells were used for all
differentiation assays (along with C2C12s in some cases), and regularly
experienced cell loss which inhibited valuable data retrieval from each
experiment. For this reason, a controlled differentiation assay was composed
for DOLLY12, DAISY4, BUFFY6 and C2C12 cells. All cells were exposed to the
same Growth media, the same differentiation media (each cell line had 8 x E6
biological replicates for each time point and 8 x 2% HS biological replicates
for each time point).

E6 = differentiation media made in-house (Essential 8 Medium mix, minus FGF
and TGFb) made as per this recipe

2% HS = DMEM/F12 + 2% Horse Serum + 1x P/S differentiation media

1 x plate containing 8 x wells in E6 and 8 x wells in 2% HS media was fixed
for each cell line at Day 0, Day 4 and Day 10 of differentiation. Once all
plates were fixed, cells were stained with DAPI and imaged on UV (on the Zaber
imaging platform). Images were run through a DAPI counting macro, which uses
FIJI (Fiji Is Just ImageJ), which results in a count output for each well. The
data was then used to calculate mean values and standard deviation of each
condition. The data was then fed into GraphPad/Prism 8 to generate Graph 1.

Key findings from visualising the graph indicate that DOLLY12 cells in E6
experience notable cell loss between days 4 - 10 of differentiation, whereas
all other primary cell lines (DAISY4 and BUFFY6) do not exhibit the same
behaviour. C2C12 cells also experience a reduction in cell numbers between day
4 and day 10 in E6 differentiation media, however the remaining cell number in
those samples is still much higher than all other samples.

An interesting observation is that C2C12 cells in both types of
differentiation media experience cell loss between Day 0 to Day 4. It is
possible that this is due to over-population of C2C12 cells in the wells. It
was also observed that the differentiation media was notably more yellow when
pulled from the incubator before feeds, therefore the cell loss may be due to
high acidity (as a result of high cell number within each well, compared to
primary cells).

Due to the fact that all cells were exposed to the exact same media, fed at
the same time and handled by the same operator (each day) and all other
primary cell lines in E6 maintained their cell numbers over 10 days, it is
unlikely that the E6 media batch itself is the reason for such a loss of cells
in DOLLY12 samples, but rather that E6, the way it is currently formulated, is
not optimised for DOLLY12 cell survival over 10 days of culture.

It is also possible, however, that the DOLLY12 cells used in this experiment
are at such a late passage that they cannot survive the 10 days of
differentiation, due to approaching the hayflick limit. This will be addressed
in future experiments.


Limitations


  * Due to inconsistencies with cell proliferation rates, each cell line was seeded into its own 96-well plates, so plate-to-plate variability may be cause for some variability between cell lines.
  * Without an intermediate time point between Day 4 and Day 10 of differentiation, it is unclear how early or late the DOLLY12 cells in E6 began to decrease in number significantly.


Future Directions

  * Verify the relationship between E6 and DOLLY12 cell loss
  * Use BUFFY6 cells for future differentiation experiments, as it appears to be a more suitable primary cell line to differentiate in E6 media (as it is currently formulated)
  * Perform DSD experiments to optimise E6 differentiation media to support cell survival of DOLLY12 MuSCs as well as all other primary MuSCs
  * Compare DOLLY12 MCB and WCB cells to determine whether cells are being lost due to senescence (reaching the hayflick limit).


Conclusion


When comparing DOLLY12, DAISY4 and BUFFY6 primary MuSCs with C2C12
(immortalised mouse myoblasts) in 10 days of differentiation, DOLLY12 cells in
E6 differentiation media suffer the greatest cell loss compared to all other
conditions.

This is possibly due to senescence of the DOLLY12 cells (from a WCB), and will
be further investigated.


