

Methylcellulose (MC) is a compound derived from cellulose, the most abundant
organic polymer. It is commonly used as a thickening agent in cell culture to
simulate semi-solid culturing conditions. It properties in enhancing the
viscosity of a liquid make it particularly alluring for single cell cloning
(SCC) experiments in attempting to adapt adherent cells to suspension.
Wherein, the rationale is that the application of MC creates an environment
mimicking suspension culture conditions such that seeded cells are essentially
free floating or "suspended". Within the literature the predominant
application of MC is in cloning, forming hybridomas or generating spheroids.
Our own investigations have found that MC can prevent CHOMP09 fibroblast from
adhering onto non-culture treated vessel, however the cells occasionally
formed larger aggregates. Additionally it is unclear if the cells can continue
to proliferate whilst suspended in the MC supplemented culture media.  
  
Papers using MC for cloning or related purposes:

Cloning of Human Neuroblastoma Cells in Methylcellulose Culture  

\- Grew human neuroblastoma cells in MC supplemented at a concentration of
0.96%

\- Culture mixture (cells + media) were placed in a 35 mm petri dish. Did not
observe clumps of 2 or more cells using their method.

\- Cells colonies appeared 3 to 4 days after plating and formed maximal
colonies between days 12 and 16 of culture, before eventually degrading.

  

A SIMPLE, SINGLE-STEP TECHNIQUE FOR SELECTING AND CLONING HYBRIDOMAS FOR THE
PRODUCTION OF MONOCLONAL ANTIBODIES

\- Cultured cells in 1.25% MC in petri dishes for colony formation.

\- Cell suspension were added to the GM before seeding, and were mixed to
ensure even distribution using vortex. Interesting note as our cells were
simply pipetted into already aliquoted growth media in a 96-well plate. This
may potentially limit the formation of aggregates and ensure the cells are
distributed throughout the growth media rather than a single location.

Others:  
\- Fluorescent labeling in semi-solid medium for selection of mammalian cells
secreting high-levels of recombinant proteins

\- Colony, hanging drop, and methylcellulose three dimensional hypoxic growth
optimization of renal cell carcinoma cell lines

It appears the most straightforward way to test if MC can result in cell
isolates in suspension is to seed fibroblasts directly in a MC supplemented
media and observe what happens.


