

LINK TO CLUBHOUSE EPIC PAGE:
https://app.clubhouse.io/vowfood/epic/16070/baseline-acf-media-on-zein

LINK TO AIRTABLE ENTRY PAGE:
https://airtable.com/tblg6twoOUgW08iLA/viwK5Elaw1pIYYJug/rec46UxIG2iIHnfBk?blocks=hide

RELATED TO MILESTONE:  Milestone 1B: Have the first biomaterials DoE designed
and underway.

AIM/PURPOSE: To record a baseline performance of MuSC adherence on Zein in ACF
media

HYPOTHESIS: Seeding scaffolds with ACF media will reduce the amount of cells
falling off scaffolds during switch to E6

TECHNICAL GAP: We do not know whether cells will adhere to zein scaffolds in
ACF-media. We also do not know if growing cells in ACF-media before switching
to E6 media will improve adhesion in E6.  

RESULTS SUMMARY:

  

MuSC adherence to zein decreased from day 1 to day 7 for all proliferation
media tested

However, MuSCs proliferated in 9C and 10C ACF media demonstrated better
prolonged adhesion than those proliferated in 11C and serum-containing media,
based on confluence at day 1 vs. day 7.

10C was the best performing proliferation media overall.

Low confluence seen on day 1 (20-30%) may have been due to low seeding density
or cells being scraped off during the manual handling involved with imaging

CONCLUSIONS:

Overall, these results suggest that cells proliferated in ACF media may
outperform those proliferated in serum-containing media in terms of both
initial and prolonged adherence to zein scaffolds in E6 differentiation
medium. Of the ACF proliferation media tested, 10C showed the most promise for
MuSC adhesion to zein.

NEXT STEPS:

Moving forward, 10C will be used as the standard media for growing. Based on
these results, it appears to promote both initial and prolonged adherence to
zein. It has also demonstrated the highest proliferative ability of all ACF
media tested, which will allow for a higher number of cells to be grown for
scaffold seeding.

To ensure minimal cell loss during imaging, manual handling should be
minimised as much as possible and performed extremely carefully. A seeding
density of >0.7M MuSCs per scaffold may also ensure a higher day 1 confluence.

  


