Key findings:


  * No culture treatment condition was able to be adapted to suspension culture, irrespective of basal media composition and inclusion of additives (trace elements, vitamins and essential/non-essential amino acids).  
  * Cultures supplemented with additives in both the D/F12 and RPMI treatment groups contained viable cells after 30 days and continued to survive until day 35.
  * Media supplementation with additives appears to assist in promoting fibroblast cell survival. 
  * Ready Flow probes appear to offer more consistent fluorescent signals of greater intensity compared to Ready Probe.  
  * Significant levels of variance were observed between replicates of the same condition across all treatments. 
  * Incubator incident (see here for full details) highlights the need for environmental monitoring, especially for long term critical suspension projects.  


Results/Discussion:


In the current work, a preliminary study was carried out to adapt adherent
DOLLY12 fibroblasts to grow in suspension as individual cells. As the
adaptation of anchorage-dependent cells to suspension culture solves scale-up
limitations associated with monolayer cultures, it is considered as an
attractive tool for industrial applications. Namely in expanding our current
ability in obtaining sufficient cellular mass to include in a first release
product. Similar to previous suspension experiments in the past, the
adaptation procedure lasted 30 days, concluding with a manual check to
evaluate if any cultures continued to survive to that time point.
Additionally, this study sought to investigate if the addition of additives
such as trace elements, vitamins, and amino acids enable fibroblasts to
proliferate in suspension.

  
  

Evident from the day 2 sampling time point was that all conditions exhibited a
significant drop in cell numbers compared to their initial seeding density
(1,000,000 cells) (Figure 1). Furthermore, this was irrespective if the cells
were cultured in a basal media supplemented with additives (Figure 1).
Fortunately, the total counts exceeded what was reported with the dead counts,
suggesting that a portion of the cells were still viable, albeit quite low
(Figure 2). As the culturing period progressed the total number of cells
gradually decreased amongst all conditions, excluding the RPMI treatment which
displayed a slight increase at day 9. A proportional decrease was observed in
dead cell tally, validating the trend observed from the total counts.
Surprisingly all the cultures saw an increase between days 9 and 21, with the
D/F12 boost demonstrating the highest jump in total cells (approximately
10,000). Unfortunately, day 24 recorded a loss in cell numbers similar to
those seen from day 9 despite the previous increase. Unexpectedly, despite the
majority of the cultures recording similar numbers across to day 28 the D/F12
displayed a sharp increase in cells, upwards of ~350,000, despite the small
number of cells recorded just 4 days prior. However, it remains unclear what
the root cause for these high cell numbers was as the Zaber images captured of
these cultures approximated fluorescent signals comparable to cells. Day 30
manual counts revealed that there were no viable cells remaining in all but 2
of the cultures tested, a replicate from each of the D/F12 Boost and RPMI
boost treatments. These conditions maintained stable counts across to day 35,
however following the incubator incident, manual hemocytometer checks
confirmed that no viable cells remained.  

  

Figure 1: Total cell counts of DOLLY12 fibroblasts (mean ± SD) seeded in
DMEM/F12 or RPMI basal media supplemented with or without additives (i.e.
boost) across the duration of the culturing period.  Due to the high variance
in the data captured several error bars are not represented completely in the
figure. Each condition was performed in duplicate (n=2).

  

Figure 2: Dead cell counts of DOLLY12 fibroblasts (mean ± SD) seeded in
DMEM/F12 or RPMI basal media supplemented with or without additives (i.e.
boost) across the duration of the culturing period.  Due to the high variance
in the data captured several error bars are not represented completely in the
figure. Each condition was performed in duplicate (n=2).


Limitations:


A limitation concerning this study revolved around the lack of consistent
fluorescent signals across the culturing period, particularly between days 10
and 20. At several instances Zaber images were not captured due to being
unable to observe any fluorescent signals that approximated cells. In addition
at several instances a white precipitate formed, presumably the Hoechst 33342
Ready Probe dye, obscuring the fluorescently labelled cells. Consequently, 2
separate cellular stains were forced to be trailed during this experiment's
duration without adequate testing beforehand; Hoechst 33342 Ready Probes and
Hoechst 33342 Ready Flow. Therefore, this could have resulted in the
characteristic rise and fall of cell counts observed across the culturing
period. Furthermore, it remained elusive as to why one particular culture
exhibited a sharp increase in cell counts towards the conclusion of the
experiment. Despite a high cell count and appearing similar to other Zaber
imaged cultures this treatment unfortunately did not contain viable cells at
the conclusion of this investigation. Separately, the original intention of
this study was to investigate the effect of removing magnesium and calcium
from the cell culture medium. Wherein, these 2 compounds are presumed to play
a role in how cells maintain adherence between other cells and/or substrates.
Unfortunately, due to procurement issues these culture mediums could not be
obtained prior to the commencement of this experiment. Finally, as depicted in
the graphs for both the total and dead cell counts, at almost every time point
for each culture there was a high level of variance between replicates. In
several instances only one replicate from each condition recording cell
numbers whilst the other was either 0 or incredibly low.


Conclusion:


The results of this study were unsuccessful in adapting fibroblast cells to
suspension culture conditions, irrespective of the basal media utilised or the
inclusion of media additives. Despite these results, it appears the the
addition of trace elements, vitamins and MEM essential and non-essential amino
acids promoted survival of fibroblast whilst in suspension. Wherein, cultures
in these conditions routinely demonstrated the highest cell counts. However
the high level of variance observed between replicates makes it difficult to
determine if these additives can promote fibroblast proliferation, and
therefore required further investigation.


Future Directions:


  * Investigate basal medium compositions lacking calcium and magnesium. 
  * Further exploration on the impact of trace elements, vitamins, and MEM essential and non-essential amino acid mixes on fibroblast survival in suspension. Both the D/F12 and RPMI conditions supplemented with additives consistently recorded the highest cell counts amongst all treatments evaluated. 


