Key findings:


  * No cells from either DOLLY12 or NANDO3 cultures were adapted to suspension culture. Additionally, this was irrespective of which stage the cells originated from, i.e., RI/MCB/WCB.
  * Cells isolated from MCB samples regularly recorded higher total cell counts across the 30-day culturing period compared to raw isolate and WCB conditions, across both the DOLLY and NANDO cell species. 
  * Complete lack of viable cells and debris during the manual count indicated that the cell pellets may have been accidentally aspirated during one of the early Opentrons feeding sessions.
  * Include redundancies in the suspension pipeline to ensure conditions that demonstrate a lack in cell viability are not maintained in culture across the entire 30-day period. A potential solution to mitigate this could be a manual hemocytometer check on day 15. 
  * Incubator incident (see here for full details) highlights the need for environmental monitoring, especially for long term critical suspension projects


Results/Discussion:


The focus of this experiment was to adapt either DOLLY12 or NANDO3 fibroblasts
to suspension culture. An additional focus also included evaluating which
stage of cell isolation (raw isolate, master cell bank, working cell bank)
from DOLLY and NANDO fibroblasts is advantageous during the adaption process.
Similar to previous experiments conducted in Q3, this involved seeding
fibroblast cells originating from either raw isolate (RI), master cell banks
(MCB), or working cell banks (WCB), into bioreactor spin tubes. Throughout the
culturing period samples of each treatment were intermittently retrieved and
stained to capture cell count data using a FIJI-designed macro. Following the
conclusion of the culturing period, each condition was manually assessed for
cell viability with any promising candidates permitted to remain in culture.

Subsequent to fibroblast thawing and seeding, samples of each trial condition
were retrieved, stained and Zaber imaged 7 days post-seeding. Initial
assessment of total cell counts highlighted that the stained cell numbers were
relatively low after approximately 1 week in culture when compared to the
initial seeding density (1,000,000 cells) (Figure 1). Cells cultured from
NANDO raw isolate (RI) samples exhibited the highest total cell count (~5000),
with the DOLLY WCB and NANDO MCB conditions also exhibiting similar counts
(Figure 1). However, despite the low cell numbers at day 7, viability
estimates highlighted that all cultures were close to 100% viability (Figure
2). Due to issues in capturing data from earlier time points (see
limitations), day 7 represented the first sampling time point in which cell
counts were quantified. As the culturing period progressed, all conditions had
a drastic reduction in cell counts by day 11 and only marginally recovered by
day 14. DOLLY12 MCB samples displayed the highest counts on day 14 indicating
the largest recovery (Figure 1).  Majority of the treatment groups maintained
their cell numbers across to day 17, whilst the DOLLY12 MCB samples exhibited
a subsequent reduction. Low cell counts obtained on day 11 revealed
substantial declines in viabilities, in particular, the NANDO RI and MCB
samples (Figure 2). All conditions had increased in cell counts by day 21,
ranging from a total of ~5000 cells per mL for the DOLLY12 MCB to
approximately ~1500 total cells for the DOLLY12 RI (Figure 1). All treatments
displayed a decline in cell numbers by day 28, with day 32 manual counts
revealing a complete absence of viable cells. It is interesting to note that
images captured of the manual counts revealed not only an absence of cells but
debris, with most images appearing completely empty (not shown here). Whilst
this confirms that no condition had viable cells at the conclusion of the
culturing period, we have frequently observed in previous suspension adaption
experiments the presence of debris and/or cells after 30 days. Consequently,
the lack of debris may suggest that at some timepoint the cell pellets were
mistakenly aspirated from the culture vessels, with only a marginally few left
remaining. Despite the continual reduction in cell numbers from day 21
onwards, the cell viabilities remained close to 100% until the conclusion of
the experiment (Figure 2).

Figure 1: Total cell counts (mean ± SEM)  for 50 mL bioreactor spin tube
cultures throughout the 30-day culturing period. Each condition performed in
triplicate (n=3).

  

Figure 2: Cell viability (mean ± SEM) for 50 mL bioreactor spin tube cultures
throughout the 30-day culturing period. Each condition performed in triplicate
(n=3).


Limitations:


A major limitation experienced in the current study was concerned with the
lack of cells and debris during the manual hemacytometer checks. During
previous experiments, the majority of manual checks, to some degree, contain
debris produced by the suspension culture conditions. However, this was not
observed in a single condition from this study. Whilst it remains unclear was
the root issue was a potential explanation is that the cell pellet along with
any debris was accidentally aspirated during one of the early Opentrons
feeding sessions. As this experiment was performed with a relatively new
feeding protocol, it was difficult to perform a water run before its
deployment. As such any aspiration settings that were not optimised may have
resulted in cell culture being aspirated during the media change. A potential
solution to mitigate this could be to perform 75% media changes instead of
100%. As such the aspiration level would be able to be adjusted to a
sufficient height such that it avoids any cell pellets. Additionally, it may
be necessary to include some sort of redundancy to examine cultures if they
contain any viable cells before the conclusion of the 30-day period. Primary
because a substantial number of resources are devoted to ensuring cells are
kept in culture during the entire 30-day period. Potentially, this could be in
the form of a manual check similar to was ifs performed at day 30, however
would be scheduled at an earlier timepoint such as day 15. On a separate note,
the first time point at which a sample was stained and imaged was on day 7.
Historically, cell cultures in suspension are characterised by mass cell death
within the first 1-3 days in culture. These typically provide the most context
on how the cultures are performing. Wherein any days later than this and the
counts are expected to be too low to gauge how the cultures are performing
since being seeded. Furthermore, by day 7 cell counts are usually too low to
assess if a particular culture is performing well without any earlier data
being captured. Moreover, it was difficult to extrapolate which cell isolation
stages are advantageous in terms of attempting to adapt cells to suspension.
As previously discussed, this was attributed to the lack of data captured
between days 1-7, which is where the most drastic reductions in cell viability
are normally seen. Finally, an incident in the incubator that housed these
culture vessels was accidentally switched and remained off for 4 days (Notion
page). However, despite this occurring on day 28 of the culturing period, it
is likely the majority of the cells were either lost or not viable at this
point.


Conclusion:


Unfortunately, cells from RI, MCB, and WCB samples across both DOLLY12 and
NANDO3 fibroblasts were unable to be adapted to suspension culture. All
cultures demonstrated a mass reduction in cell viabilities within one week
evidenced by the low cell numbers of the first data capture time point (day
7).  Results also indicated that there were no major differences between the
cell isolation stage (RI v MCB v WCB) on the cells' ability to adapt to
suspension. Wherein no condition from the three stages had adapted to
suspension or performed significantly better when compared to each other.
Finally, the incubator incident, which was switched off for 4 days, has
highlighted the importance of having environmental monitoring for long-term
suspension culture experiments.


Future Directions:


  * Evaluate the effectiveness of 75% media changes compared to 100% in terms of removing debris whilst maintaining cell pellet integrity. Additionally, to avoid any instances in which the cell pellet may be accidentally aspirated. 
  * Standardise the cell staining and imaging protocol in order to prioritise data capture for the most critical time points (days 1-2), particularly during the first week in suspension culture. 
  * Incorporate learnings from incubator incident to develop preventative measures to ensure situations like this are not repeated. 
  * Repeat comparison of RI, MCB, and WCB cell samples using crocodile fibroblasts, primarily as crocodile cells are to be used in Vows' first product. 


