Background:


Comparing the nutritional profiles of various cell types has significant
implications for the composition of cultured meat products. Specifically at
Vow, the comparison of fibroblast, myoblast and muscle cell nutritional
profiles allows compositional decisions to be made for long term products.
Moreover, a nutritional characterization of our cell types can be used to
elucidate signature bio-molecules specific to cell type. By identifying these
signature bio-molecules, we can begin to understand the biological basis for
the taste, mouthfeel, texture and colour of muscle. Naturally, this
understanding will also inform decisions about the composition of Vow's
product lineup in several years.

A particularly important makeup of a nutritional profile is the total protein
content offered. Each cell type likely contains protein to varying degrees
however the total protein content specific to each cell type has not yet been
established at Vow. In-house protein kits were identified as a useful and
precise tool to address this technical gap, namely the widely used Bradford
and BCA assays which hinge on a colourmetric change based on the amount of
total protein in a sample. These assays have proven to be accurate and easy to
use in biological analysis techniques such as Western Blotting [1]. While
their use to measure total protein content may not be as robust as popular
measurement techniques for food such as the Kjedahl method and NMR, they are
likely to provide a preliminary estimate. This preliminary data can then be
validated and re-assessed using the aforementioned methods closer to the
launch of our products.

With both the Bradford and BCA assays, it remains unclear which method can be
used to obtain reliable protein values from our cell types. The ideal assay
would be easy-to-use, cost-effective, sensitive and able to account for total
protein accurately with minimal variability between replicates. Based on these
attributes, both assays form ideal candidates for a reliable protein assay
that can be used routinely at Vow. Hence, an assessment of the two assays is
warranted to inform the decision on which protein assay will be used routinely
at Vow. Perhaps the most important attribute is the minimal variability
between replicates in both assays. Hence, this will be the primary factor to
inform a final decision.  
  
This experiment aimed to conduct an assessment of both the Bradford and BCA
assay and also characterise the protein content for the DOLLY12 fibroblast,
myoblast and muscle cell types.


Summary of events:


  * DOLLY12 Fibroblast and myoblast cultures were seeded.
  * Fibroblast cultures were then passaged into a well plate format and grown to confluency
  * Fibroblasts were treated with TGF-b and Vit-C and then lysed the following day.
  * Lysates were analysed using the Bradford and BCA assay (same day).
  * Myoblasts were differentiated in E6 for 15 days, however were not analysed due to cell stress/senescent-like morphology.
  * Another MCB-derived myoblast culture was seeded which also gave rise to similar morphology.


Key results and findings:
  
  
Figure 1: Plot of average protein values obtained from every fibroblast
culture (each well) in a 24 well plate using the Bradford and BCA assay.

Table 1: T-test of protein values obtained from the Bradford and BCA assays of
fibroblasts in a 24 well plate (data from Figure 1).  
  
  


Discussion and limitations:


Figure 1 depicts the variability of both the Bradford and BCA assays. Both
assays were performed using the same protein solutions obtained from cell
lysis of the plate and hence each Bradford and BCA derived protein value was
derived from the same samples. From this plot, it is apparent that the
Bradford assay displays a greater spread between replicates when compared to
the BCA assay. This is further evidenced by the comparison of the standard
deviations between the assays (BCA - SD:5 ug, Bradford - SD:9 ug).  
  
Interestingly, while the BCA assay is more inclusive of various proteins (thus
being more representative of total protein), it appears to display lower
average protein values across all 24 replicate wells in comparison to the
Bradford assay. This is higlighted by the mean of the Bradford derived protein
values (53 ug) when compared with BCA derived values (40 ug). While this could
suggest that the BCA assay in fact, is not able to capture the same amount of
protein that the Bradford assay does (specifically for our cells), it could
also point to potential false positives/overestimation depicted by the
Bradford assay.

While both assays use active reagents of different natures and binding
mechanisms - it was anticipated that each assay would produce similar protein
values. However, as evidenced by Table 1 - the assays produce statistically
significant protein values from one another. Currently, one PBS wash is
performed prior to the addition of Hoescht/PBS to remove the serum. This wash
step is important to prevent non-specific binding of the binding reagent with
the amino acid profile found in DMEM/F12. Noteably, the Bradford assay is
especially sensitive to Lysine, Arginine and Histidine [2] all of which are
found in DMEM/F12. Considering the basal medium for E6 is DMEM/F12, perhaps
more than one (or two including Hoescht/PBS incubation step) is warranted to
remove all traces of amino acids and other reagents. It is possible that
insufficient (and possibly inconsistent) washes may be responsible for the
larger variation observed in the fibroblast lysates quantified with the
Bradford assay. The BCA assay while also sensitive to the amino acids present
in DMEM/F12, is sensitive to a wider range of proteins rather than specific
amino acids (Lysine , Arginine and Histidine) as the Bradford assay is. Hence,
the effect of inconsistent washes giving rise to varying amounts of residual
DMEM/F12 in each well may be lessened with when analysing with the BCA assay
(although some variation is to be expected as evidenced in Figure 1).

Moreover, while a clear increase in variation between replicates is observed
with the Bradford assay - the BCA assay also features some variation. It is
important to note that the data generated features no normalisation to cell
density per well. The fibroblast cultures were expanded in growth media and
hence may give rise to variations in cell density despite each well being
seeded with even amounts. This would be largely due to variations in relative
doublings times and growth rates between wells. However, the assumption made
in the data presented in Figure 1, is that all cultures are comparable and
have the same density - which is likely not the case. Moreover, some
peeling/sheet formation is observed in all fibroblast cultures to varying
degrees. This also has not been factored into the final protein values. The
Hoescht staining and imaging of each well allows the images to be run through
ImageJ macro analysis, thus providing a means of accounting for cell (and
consequently protein) differences between wells. Currently, no Zaber
compatible ImageJ macro is available for 24 well plates and thus the
normalisation of protein to cell density has not been done for this data.
Future image analysis work will allow the development of well plate macros,
allowing for normalisation when doing protein assays in the future. It is
anticipated that the variation for both the BCA and Bradford assays may be
lessened by normalisation to cell counts from each well.

A comparison between DOLLY12 fibroblasts and myoblasts was unable to take
place. This is largely due to ongoing bouts of cell death and senescence in
both WCB and MCB derived myoblast cultures during differentation. This issue
is extremely important and is being investigated external to this experiment.
Hence, the discussion of the senescence-like morphology of the myoblast
cultures is beyond the scope of this experiment and will be discussed under
the "Cell Loss Investigation" EPIC.

Despite, the preliminary comparison depicted in this experiment - it is not
sufficient to make a conclusive decision regarding the routine use of one
protein assay over the other. While the BCA assay appears to provide less
variability in it's protein estimation, this comparison must be repeated and
monitored to see if the same results are reproduced.


Future directions:


  * This experiment will be repeated and monitored to see if similar results are obtained. One approach is to obtain lysates from cell suspensions rather than cells seeded and grown in a well plate format. While a means to normalise protein values against cell density is being developed (e.g. a 24wp DAPI macro) - this approach will allow protein values to be normalised against cell count numbers.
  * As mentioned above, a robust means to normalise protein values to relative cell density in each replicate will be developed.
  * Quality control measures such as increasing the number of PBS washes (post-E6 removal) will be implemented and the effect on variability for each assay will be monitored.
  * The comparison of the total protein obtained from each cell type is being investigated on a larger scale to this experiment. Hence, this aspect of this experiment will not be repeated on this scale and rather is being translated to this EPIC.


References:


[1] Noble, J. E., Knight, A. E., Reason, A. J., Di Matola, A., & Bailey, M. J.
A. (2007). A comparison of protein quantitation assays for biopharmaceutical
applications. Molecular biotechnology, 37(2), 99-111.

[2] Lu, T. S., Yiao, S. Y., Lim, K., Jensen, R. V., & Hsiao, L. L. (2010).
Interpretation of biological and mechanical variations between the Lowry
versus Bradford method for protein quantification. North American journal of
medical sciences, 2(7), 325-328\. https://doi.org/10.4297/najms.2010.2325


