Key findings:


  * EMEMα cells supplemented with hydrolysates performed better than their RPMI equivalents in terms of average doublings and total cumulative doublings across the 10, 7, and 5% FBS treatments.
  * All RPMI and EMEMα cultures exhibited a decrease in doublings as the serum concentration was gradually reduced from 10% to 5% FBS. However all cultures exhibited a high degree of viability.
  * Malt extract and phytone peptone hydrolysates demonstrated the highest doublings across all the RPMI and EMEMα hydrolysate media treatments (excluding the serum, RPMI, and EMEMα controls)
  * Fibroblast cells cultured in EMEMα consistently exhibited higher number of doublings in each of the serum concentrations (i.e., 10, 7 and, 5 % FBS) compared to their RPMI equivalents. This was also irrespective of the hydrolysate utilised. 
  * EMEMα basal media appears to superior to the RPMI basal medium. Results also indicated that EMEMα cultured cells had more doublings compared to the serum control when both were supplemented with 10% FBS. However, this requires additional evaluation.


Results/Discussion:


Adaption of adherent anchorage-dependent mammalian cells to suspension culture
is generally performed using two independent approaches. The classical "fast
adaptation" approach has typically been the method of choice for the majority
of suspension culture experiments conducted during Q3/Q4 by the pool party
team. However, in contrast to fast adaption conditions, slow adaption is
characterised by weaning cultures off FBS by employing the use of several
steps of gradual adaptation. Literature has indicated that it may be
beneficial to adapt cells initially to low serum or serum-free conditions
before subjecting cells to suspension conditions. Therefore, this
investigation aimed to gradually adapt adherent DOLLY12 fibroblasts using two
basal media compositions each supplemented with plant-derived hydrolysates. To
compare the effects of hydrolysate supplementation in promoting fibroblast
proliferation, a serum control (SC) condition that was maintained in DMEM/F12
with 10% FBS during the duration of the experiment, was included.



To assess the impact of basal media composition and supplementation of
hydrolysates, doublings times for each RMPI and EMEMα condition were
calculated from counts obtained whilst the cultured cells were in either 10,
7, or 5% FBS. Average doublings were calculated across the 10,7 and 5% FBS
concentrations in order to provide an output more reflective of the
performance of the cultures across multiple passages. Initial assessment of
average doublings in the 10% FBS concentration highlighted that all RPMI
conditions exhibited a lower number of doublings compared to the SC (Figure
1a). Cells in RPMI media supplemented with malt extract and phytone peptone
hydrolysates demonstrated the highest average doublings amongst the RPMI
hydrolysate conditions (Figure 1a). Additionally, the RPMI control displayed
the highest average doublings excluding the SC. Conversely, cells cultured in
EMEMα all demonstrated average doublings exceeding the SC (Figure 1b).
Similarly, the EMEMα, which had an absence of hydrolysates, performed the best
overall with several of the hydrolysate conditions, such as the malt extract
and phytone peptone performing to a similar degree (Figure 1b). As both the
RPMI and EMEMα cultures were gradually weaned to 7% FBS most displayed either
similar levels of average doublings or a decrease. Cultures belonging to the
RPMI control continued to maintain the highest average doublings, excluding
the SC, with both the malt extract and phytone peptone trailing close behind
(Figure 1a). The phytone hydrolysate culture displayed a moderate decrease in
average doublings, only less than once every 7 days (Figure 1a).  Conversely,
all the EMEMα cultures exhibited a decrease in average doublings following the
switch from 10% FBS to 7% FBS (Figure 1b). Whilst all showed a decrease, the
EMEMα control, phytone, and malt extract treatments were either on par with
the SC or higher in terms of average doublings. Additionally, the average
doublings across all the EMEMα cultures were higher when compared to their
RPMI equivalents. Unfortunately, the EMEMα cultures continued to display this
trend, exhibiting a drop in average doublings once the serum concentration was
reduced to 5% FBS (Figure 1b). Most RPMI treatments exhibited a relatively
small decrease, with both the RPMI control and phytone peptone maintaining the
highest average doublings, excluding the SC. Fortunately, despite exhibiting a
drop in average doublings in the 7% FBS concentration, the phytone treatment
had a marginal increase despite the reduction in serum concentration (Figure
1a). Interestingly the continual drop in doublings from the EMEMα control
suggests that the hydrolysate supplementation is beneficial (Figure 1b).
Across both the RPMI and EMEMα treatments both the malt extract and phytone
peptone hydrolysates performed with the highest average doublings at 5% FBS
concentration.

Figure 1: Average doublings of DOLLY12 fibroblasts (mean ± SEM) seeded in RPMI
or EMEMα media supplemented with hydrolysates (5g/L) during weaning of FBS.
(a) Fibroblast seeded in RPMI basal media. (b) Fibroblasts seeded in EMEMα
basal media. Serum control condition was cultured in DMEM/F12 and was
maintained in 10% FBS during the weaning process.

  

  

When evaluating the total cumulative doublings, it is evident that the EMEMα
conditions performed relatively higher across all the hydrolysate samples
(Figure 2b). Interestingly both the malt extract and phytone peptone had the
highest or sufficiently high doublings in both the RPMI and EMEMα treatments
(Figure 2). Strangely the phytone hydrolysate in the RPMI treatment had a much
lower number of doublings compared to the EMEMα equivalent (Figure 2). Wherein
this highlights the importance of media composition given the basal media was
the only difference between the two conditions. Comparing the total average
doublings of the tested treatments against the serum control revealed a
slightly different trend. All the cultures grown in EMEMα with hydrolysates
show evidence of total average doublings comparable to the SC (Figure 3b).
Additionally, each EMEMα condition was substantially higher compared to its
RPMI equivalent, reinforcing the advantage of the EMEMα media compared to
RPMI. The EMEMα control had the highest total followed closely by the malt
extract, phytone, and phytone peptone, all recording more than 6 total average
doublings (Figure 3b). On the contrary, all RPMI cultures had less than 5
total average doublings, the closest of which to the SC was the RPMI control
(Figure 3a).  Similarly, both the malt extract and phytone peptone were the
best two performing hydrolysate treatments (Figure 3a).

  

Figure 2: Total cumulative doublings of DOLLY12 fibroblasts seeded in RPMI or
EMEMα media supplemented with hydrolysates (5g/L) during weaning of FBS. (a)
Fibroblast seeded in RPMI basal media. (b) Fibroblasts seeded in EMEMα basal
media. Serum control condition was cultured in DMEM/F12 and was maintained in
10% FBS during the weaning process.

  

Figure 3: Total average doublings of DOLLY12 fibroblasts seeded in RPMI or
EMEMα media supplemented with hydrolysates (5g/L) during weaning of FBS. (a)
Fibroblast seeded in RPMI basal media. (b) Fibroblasts seeded in EMEMα basal
media. Serum control condition was cultured in DMEM/F12 and was maintained in
10% FBS during the weaning process.





Limitations:


Despite representing a preliminary study in which plant-derived hydrolysates
were directly used as a supplement in low serum conditions, this study did not
investigate the effects of modifying the hydrolysate concentrations. Namely
increasing hydrolysate concentration as the FBS concentration was periodically
decreased. Information concerning hydrolysate supplementation typically
suggests a final concentration between 3-11 g/L whilst this investigation
supplemented all hydrolysates at 5 g/L. Therefore, it remains unclear if
additional supplementation would benefit fibroblast proliferation whilst in
adherent culture. Moreover, due to limitations in product supply, several of
the hydrolysates that were planned to be incorporated in this experiment were
delayed in their arrival. As a result, both the wheat and pea peptones,
recommendations suggested by external experts, were not included. Furthermore,
only one hydrolysate was added to each individual culture throughout the
duration of this experiment. There may be synergistic effects between multiple
hydrolysates that could be investigated to clarify if they have an additive
effect on fibroblast growth and doubling. Finally due to a shift in priorities
during the Q3/Q4 transition this experiment was unfortunately placed on an
indefinite hold, with all cell samples frozen in liquid nitrogen. It remains
unclear at this point whether hydrolysates will be able to support fibroblast
growth and proliferation at serum concentrations below 5%.


Conclusion:


Despite hydrolysate supplementation being assessed in a previous experiment
(EPIC 21699), this is the first experiment in which hydrolysates were assessed
as suitable alternatives for FBS. Initial results indicate that the addition
of hydrolysates was beneficial during the weaning of FBS from 10% to 5% for
fibroblasts in adherent culture. However, this only represents a 50% reduction
in total serum compared to the serum-free targets necessary for a cell product
release. Differences observed between the RPMI and EMEMα media treatments have
highlighted that EMEMα may be a potentially superior basal media alternative
to DMEM/F12. Namely in its ability to promote fibroblast proliferative
capacity, evidenced by the higher doublings compared to the SC at 10% FBS.
Finally, despite the reduction of doublings as the cells were weaned to 5% FBS
this study indicates that sheep fibroblasts can survive in lower serum
conditions. Ultimately, this highlights that it may be sensible to initially
adapt cells to low serum or serum-free conditions before subjection to
suspension culture.  


Future Directions:


  * Continue adapting cells to lower FBS concentrations and if feasible serum-free media. Whilst results on viability were not presented in the results/discussion all cultures demonstrated high viabilities during the trypan blue exclusion counts. However, the cells appear to slow down in terms of how many doublings they can undertake in a week. 
  * Evaluate additional hydrolysates for suitability as an FBS alternative, namely the pea, wheat, and chickpea peptones, as these were not assessed in this study due to procurement issues. 
  * Evaluate if there are additive effects between multiple hydrolysates in a single culture. This would involve culturing fibroblast in media supplemented with 2 or more hydrolysate at a given time.
  * Incorporate EMEMα media in future fibroblast culturing experiments. It was evident that the EMEMα media culture with 10% FBS demonstrated more doublings than the SC (DMEM/F12 + 10% FBS). EMEMα may be a superior alternative to DMEM/F12 as a basal media, however, this requires further evaluation.


