

Process:

1\. Pre-load the designed 384>96 well plate 1-well picking protocol in the
Opentrons software.

2\. Aliquot 5 mL of the desired media required for the media runs and place in
water bath to warm up 09:36

  1. Growth media used was CD CHO + 10%KSR + 1:100 ACA + 4mM L-glutamine

3\. Set up the Opentrons deck according to the layout prescribed in the
designed protocol (See here)

4\. Perform a dry run without any reagents to confirm that the protocol works
as expected. Also note down the time it takes for the Opentrons to complete
the entire process, from the moment it moves to retrieve a tip to the moment
it then dispenses that tip. This will be used as a benchmark before we make
adjustment to improve the protocol.

  1. Total time taken: 40 sec from initial movement to grab tip to then dispensing tip into the trash

5\. Add 75 uL of growth media to well A1-A12 of the 384 well plate. These
wells will be used to test to Opentrons settings such as aspiration height,
dispense speed etc.

6\. Perform the Opentorns run for a single well (i.e. well A1) with the pre-
defined settings. Note down any observations or recommendations to improve the
speed/efficiency of the protocol. Again note down the time taken.

  

  

Run 1:

Observations:

\- Small amount of media was left in the 384 well. Might need to adjust the
height at which the media is aspirated before transferring to the 96-well
plate.

\- Minor presence of bubbles. Need to determine if changing the aspiration
speed will affect how many bubbles are produced.

Adjustments:

\- changed the aspiration and dispense speed for all steps to 300 uL/s,
instead of the default setting

\- adjusted the height of the mxing step from 0.5 mm to 1 mm

Total time taken for 1-well: 40 seconds

Run 2:  

Observations/adjustments:

\- adjusting the aspiration/dispense speeds significantly speed up the process
reducing the total time by 10 sec.

Total time taken for 1-well: 30 seconds

Run 3:  

Observations/adjustments:

\- adjusted the aspiration height from the transfer step from 1 mmm to 0.5 mm
in order the remove the remaining media in the well. Improved how much media
was removed however there is still a small amount left, within threshold.

Run 4:  

Observations/adjustments:

\- Included a 2 second delay between the mixing step and transfer step,
however it did not assist in how the pipette removeed the media from the well.
Was removed.

Total time taken:  2 min 36 sec with 2 sec delay (removing the delay results
in a time of 37 seconds for each well - 148 seconds total)

Run 4:  

Observations/adjustments:

\- Repeated run 4 without the 2 second delay and total time was 2 min and 27
sec (147 sec) - therefore approximately 30.5 seconds per well (subtracting the
26 second delay at the beginning) in line with the assumption made in run 3.



7\. Repeat step 6 to refine the protocol noting down any observations and/or
adjustment made

8\. Once the protocol is finalised perform a media run for at least 4 wells,
observing if the protocol works as intended and the time taken for multiple
wells.

9\. Attach the finalised protocol below




Finalised protocol for 384>96 1-well picking for suspension cells


