

## Completed by: AK


Aim/Purpose


Adapt existing 384>96>24>6 1-well picking protocols and evaluate OT2 picking
times using these protocols with growth media runs.


Hypothesis


All adherent 1-well picking protocols will be able to be successfully adapted
for suspension conditions which will result in a subsequent reduction in OT2
picking times for 384>96>24>6 protocols.


Technical Gap


Current estimates for clone picking 6x 384-well plates predict that the time
required to perform a clone picking of that magnitude will exceed the total
amount of time available within a single working day. Therefore it is either
necessary to purchase an additional Opentrons machine or refine the timeframes
concerning picking times for suspension cells. As previously mentioned clone
picking for suspension cells will ideally require less time due to the absence
of both the dPBS wash step and tryple incubation time. However in order to
clarify the total time expected when "passaging" a 384-well plate using
suspension adapted protocols it is necessary to perform a growth media run.


Method/Procedure


Three major steps in which the SCC pipeline will be adapted for suspension
culture conditions.

Step 1: Adapt all existing adherent protocols for 384>96, 96>24 and 24>6 well
plates for suspension culture conditions

Step 2: Perform a growth media run for a single well for each of the three
protocols, to determine optimal aspiration heights, aspiration speed and
general workflow. All adjustments will feed into the redesigned protocols
obtained from step 1.

Step 3: Perform a growth media run "passaging" each of the well plate types
assuming that 25% of clones are taken forward at each stage (i.e., 96 clones
for a 384-well plate, 24 clones for a 96-well plate and 6 clones for a 24-well
plate).

  

Step 1

1\. Download original templates developed for adherent 1-well picking on the
Opentrons. Can be found on the Vow google drive. Three are required:

  1. 384>96
  2. 96>24
  3. 24>6

2\. Adapt all three protocols for suspension culture conditions. This involves
eliminating the dPBS wash, tryple incubation. Consequently as the cells are
grown suspended in the growth media each protocol will only contain an initial
mixing step followed by a transfer step in which the cell resuspension is
transferred into the new culture vessel.

  

Step 2

At this stage the script for performing clone picking from multiple wells will
not be required as it is only necessary to test the newly designed protocols.
This will serve as a troubleshooting step to finalise the protocol before
implementing into the multi well script.

  

1\.  Set up Opentrons machine according to the layout detailed in the relevant
Opentrons protocol.

Note* Each protocol will be slightly different due to the requirements of
different well plates and pipette tip sizes.

2\.  Run Opentrons protocol for a single well, initially beginning with the
384>96 "passaging" protocol.  

3\. Make adjustments to aspiration speed, aspiration height or any other
feature to optimise the process by which it can be performed automatically.
Namely focus on reducing bubble formation, whilst maximising speed. Also
detail the total time by which it takes to perform the entire process of
mixing, then transferring. Also worth breaking down the time taken to do the
individual steps.

4\. Repeat steps 1-3 for the remaining protocols, i.e., 96>24 and 24>6 well
plates.

  

Step 3

This will first require developing the script, to perform the multi well
passaging. This will ultimately be similar to step 2, however instead of
passaging single wells, it will be 25% for each respective well plate (i.e.,
96 for a 384-well plate etc).


