

07/05/21  Plate matrix meats scaffolds ready for seeding  (Task performed by
Ella Hodder)  

Moved electrospun Zein samples from original UV sterilised 96-well plate
provided by matrixmeats to a new non-treated 96-well plate using sterilise
tweezers, as follows:

Plate 1 (cell-laden):

NOTE

When I tried to move the zein/gluten scaffolds with tweezers the material was
far too fragile and could not be lifted from the plates. The zein/gluten
scaffold material was very thin and in some wells did not cover the whole
well. For this reason only the Zein samples were plated onto the new plates. I
tested adding media to the zein/gluten samples to see if this would make for
easier handling/lifting, but this did not help.  
  
The Zein gluten samples will instead have to remain in situ, and be seeded
directly into the plates on Monday.

I labelled the Zein/gluten plate lid as follows (see below diagram) to show
which scaffolds will be seeded on Monday and in what media

WZG = wet zein/gluten and DZG = dry zein/gluten

Red areas represent wells which should be seeded and fed using ACF media,
whereas the green areas are for serum media.  

Columns 1-8 containing coloured wells are to be seeded with cells.

COLUMNS 9-12 containing coloured wells are to be cell free controls (add media
only - red for ACF, green for serum!)

  
NOTE \- There will be 40 zein/gluten scaffolds that will not be seeded or
used, these will be cell-free controls. We have one more 96-welll plate full
of Zein/gluten scaffolds for later experimentation if needed.

NOTE \- the 96-wp provided by matrix meats is black and so it is harder to
visualise the writing on the when the lid is on the plate (see last image
below)

A separate cell free plate was prepared for the Zein samples only. Only wet
zein samples were included in the plate in the end, this was to prevent sample
wastage (53 samples left in original plate) as wet/dry will only effect cell
seeded scaffolds.

Plate 2 (cell-free):

3x Plates now as follows:

  

Pre-wetting of samples:

200ul of F12 (S 1691) was added to samples marked as either WZ or WZG (wet
zein, wet zein gluten). This media will be removed 1-2hrs prior to seeding on
monday.

The 3 plates were then para-filmed and placed in the biomaterials fridge 12:00

  


