

## Completed by: AK




Single cell cloning (SCC) is the process by which a single cell is isolated
from a multiclonal or heterogonous population of cells to generate a clonal
population that is genetically identical [1]. Traditional SCC protocols used
at Vow are characterised by FACS sorting individual cells into separate wells
of a 384-well plate, such that any population derived from those cells are
classified as "clonal". Wherein, each daughter cell originates from a single
parent cell and are thus genetically identical. However this attempt at SCC
intends to combine the current SCC pipeline for adherent cells with ultra low
attachment (ULA) plates and/or coatings. ULA plates and coatings are designed
to prevent cell adhesion onto culture-ware surfaces, thus resulting in a
rudimentary prototype to evaluate our current suspension SCC pipeline. ULA
plates are typically purchased commercially, however their limited
availability and substantially high price limits the high throughput
capabilities required to process a significant number of clones per month.
Therefore to mitigate this issue, ULA coatings will be tested as alternatives
to the standard commercial products in their effectiveness in preventing cell
adhesion, specifically crocodile fibroblasts. The rationale is that by
preventing cell adhesion, ULA coatings will result in the crocodile
fibroblasts being suspended in growth medium due to being unable to adhere, as
such mimicking suspension culture conditions. If successful, crocodile
fibroblasts will be sorted into 384-well plates coated with these compounds
and processed using the newly developed suspension SCC pipeline.

  

Background on ULA plates and coatings:

According to manufactures of ULA plates, these products are designed using a
covalently bound hydrogel layer that effectively inhibits cellular attachment
whilst simultaneously minimising protein absorption and cellular activation
[2]. ULA attachment plates are typically used for the generation of spheroids,
which are cell aggregates that self-assemble in an environment that prevents
cell attachment to a flat surface [3]. Due to FACS sorting individual cells it
is not currently anticipated that this will be an issue. However if the ULA
plates prevent cell adhesion and the crocodile cells survive in suspension,
they may potentially form spheroids as they divide close to one another.
Previous experiments investigating the hanging drop technique found that
fibroblast cells did not survive once they formed spheroids, likely due to
necrotic cores [4]. In addition to testing ULA plates, ULA coatings will be
investigated for their ability to prevent cellular attachment, in the hopes of
expanding our throughput beyond the commercial ULA plates. Typical coatings
involve agarose, polyHEMA, pluronic F-127 and poloxamer 407. Unfortunately
several of these of these coatings have not been evaluated in preventing
adhesion for primary crocodile fibroblasts. Consequently they will need to
troubleshooted prior to incorporating them in this current suspension SCC
experiment. Fortunately, agarose and pluronic F-127 have been evaluated in a
previous experiment, however the agarose was found to degrade and detach from
the T-25 flask surface it was coated in and the pluronic F-127 did not prevent
the attachment of fibroblast cells, at a concentration of 0.1% [4]. Therefore
prior to including these coatings they will first have to be evaluated in
preventing cell attachment in 96 well plates. If successful they will then be
included in addition to commercial ULA plates and processed using the
suspension SCC pipeline.

  

  

References:

[1] Longo, P.A., Kavran, J.M., Kim, M.S. and Leahy, D.J., 2014. Single cell
cloning of a stable mammalian cell line. Methods Enzymol, 536, pp.165-172.

[2] https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/AU/en/product/sigma/cls7007

[3] Białkowska, K., Komorowski, P., Bryszewska, M. and Miłowska, K., 2020.
Spheroids as a type of three-dimensional cell cultures--Examples of methods of
preparation and the most important application. International journal of
molecular sciences, 21(17), p.6225.

[4] https://au-
mynotebook.labarchives.com/share/Vow%2520-%2520Team%2520Science/NDg5MC42fDEwNjMxNy8zNzYyL1RyZWVOb2RlLzIxODMwNDE3MTZ8MTI0MTQuNTk5OTk5OTk5OTk5


