

## Completed by: AK


Aim/Purpose


Perform a suspension SCC run of CHOMP fibroblasts using ultra low attachment
plates and/or coatings to prevent cell adhesion.


Hypothesis


Incorporation of low attachment plates and/or coatings will prevent CHOMP
fibroblasts from adhering to culture surfaces and enable them to survive in
suspension such that we will attain ≥1 clonal cell line adapted to suspension.


Technical Gap


One of the current blockers in terms of developing and optimising the
suspension SCC pipeline is the lack of suspension cells. Whilst a commercial
cell line has been ordered, it has a significantly long lead time and so
alternative experiments must be designed in the meantime, that offer a
temporary solution to the suspension cells. The approach employed here will
involve the use of ULA plates and/or coatings in order to prevent crocodile
fibroblast attachment to the culture surface. As such, the cells would ideally
be suspended in the growth media, effectively mimicking suspension culture
conditions. If successful this will enable the cells to be processed using the
newly developed suspension SCC pipeline.


Method/Procedure


Please note that this study will be making a few major assumption in regards
to it's experimental design. See below:

1. No ULA plates and/or coatings have been tested or have proved successful in terms of preventing crocodile fibroblast attachment onto culture-ware surfaces. 

2. Assuming the ULA plates and/or coating prevent fibroblast adhesion it is unclear if single cells isolated using FACS will be able to survive in the artificial suspension culture conditions generated by the ULA plates and/or coatings.

3. If the coatings are unsuccessful in inhibiting cell attachment during the preliminary testing, they will not be included in the FACS sorting. Only the commercial ULA plate will be included.  

It is necessary to highlight these assumptions as a failure in a single one
can result in this experiment being terminated prematurely.

  

  

Experimental Plan:

Step 1: Investigating feasibility of ULA coating in inhibiting crocodile
fibroblast attachment to 96-well plate culture base.

  

[Day 1]: Preparation and testing of ULA coatings

\- Protocols for the preparation of 1.5% (w/v) agarose, 1% methylcellulose
and, 1% poloxamer 407 can be found below:

1.5% (w/v) agarose  

Materials & Reagents

  * 96 well plate (current protocol will make enough to coat ~10 plates)
  * 100ml glass bottle (Schott Duran)
  * 200-500ml DMEM (Life Technologies; 11995065)
  * 1.5g powdered agarose 
  * Hot plate or microwave

Method: prepare 1.5% (w/v) agarose solution

1\. In TC hood, measure out 100ml DMEM, place in glass bottle

2\. Weigh out 1.5g agarose in weigh-boat

3\. In TC hood, add agarose to DMEM and seal lid (seal shut all the way)

4\. Dissolve agarose:

5\. Place bottle on hot plate, set to 250°C and leave to stand on hot plate
for 10 minutes, check regularly. Unscrew lid half a turn, swirl leave for
another 10 minutes, check regularly and swirl. Remove from hot plate when
agarose is gently bubbling and all agarose particulate has dissolved

OR

6\. Microwave in 30 second batches with lid slightly unscrewed, until all
agarose particulate has dissolved

7\. Take to TC hood *glass and contents are very hot: transport with care*

8\. Place ~10ml in reagent reservoir and use multichannel pipette to coat
50ul/well in 96 well plate

9\. Change tips regularly: agarose will begin to set as soon as it has been
removed from heat

10\. Leave plates on bench in TC hood to stand for 20 minutes before using

11\. Can be stored for up to 2 weeks. Seal edges with parafilm and store at
4°C. Recommended for best results to use newly prepared agarose plates for
spheroid compaction

  

1% methylcellulose

  1. Heat up 100 mL of ultrapure MilliQ water to 60-80°C . Add 1 g MC powder and agitate until particles are evenly dispersed - with vigorous shaking. A white precipitate should form on surface of the liquid.
  2. Immerse the vessel containing the MC into room temperature tap water for 5 minutes shaking and swirling the vessel intermittently until the solution becomes clear and contains no visible solids.
  3. Pass through a 0.22 µm to sterilise the solution. Prepared solution may be aliquoted and stored at 4°C for up to 12 months. MC serves as a non-cytotoxic, inert, suspending agent to enhance cell-cell adhesion and discourage the formation of an adherent cell monolayer. 
  4. Add 50 uL of solution to each well to coat the surface and leave on BSC bench for 20 minutes

  

1% poloxamer 407

  1. Add 1 g poloxamer 407 powder to 100 mL of Milli-Q ultrapure water and agitate until particles are evenly dispersed - with vigorous shaking. A white precipitate should form on surface of the liquid.
  2. Pass through a 0.22 µm to sterilise the solution.
  3. Add 50 uL of solution to each well to coat the surface and leave on BSC bench for 20 minutes

1% pluronic F-127

  1. Add 1 g pluronic F-127 powder to 100 mL of Milli-Q ultrapure water and agitate until particles are evenly dispersed - with vigorous shaking. A white precipitate should form on surface of the liquid.
  2. Pass through a 0.22 µm to sterilise the solution.
  3. Add 50 uL of solution to each well to coat the surface and leave on BSC bench for 20 minutes

  

[Day 2]: Thaw 1x vial of crocodile WCB fibroblast and seed fibroblast cells at
~1000 cells per well. Observe cells periodically to determine if the crocodile
cells attach to the culture surface.




Experiment Plan:

Step 2: Suspension SCC with ULA plates and/or coatings

Note: if the ULA coatings can successfully prevent attachment of fibroblasts
to the 96-well plate base they will be incorporated in the suspension SCC run
FACS sort.

Growth Media: RPMI + 20% FBS + 1X P/S + FGF (100 ng/mL)  

Date  
Day  
Task(s)  
Notes  
  
9-Nov-2021  
Harvest CHOMP fibroblasts  
  
  
D0 FACS sort into 4 x 384-well plates:

  1. Prepare 4 x plates with fresh growth medium (RPMI + 20% FBS + 1X P/S + FGF)
  2. Prepare 20 mL FACS Buffer
  3. Harvest fibroblasts from T175s
  4. Take to Garvan and sort 
  5. Centrifuge plates
  6. Transport plates back to Vowse, place in incubator

If feasible include an additional plate of DOLLY12 fibroblasts as a control
plate.  
  
D1 Zaber scan plates  
  
  
  
D2Zaber scan plates  
  
  
  
D3Zaber scan plates  
  
  
  
D7Zaber scan plates  
  
  
  
D10Zaber scan plates  
Check if any wells are over-confluent. If so, perform picking on D11 and
adjust next time to do picking earlier. It not, can wait and scan again in a
couple of days.  
  
  
D~11Pick high confluence wells from 384-well to 96-well plates  
Generate pick-list through imaging cells on Zaber then running through ML
model.  
  
  

384-well plate with ULA coatings (if used):

  

  


