Aim/Purpose


  1. To assess survival of DOLLY12 cells in culture after Hoechst staining.    
  2. To assess survival of DOLLY12 cells in culture after Dapi staining.    


Technical Gap


Fix and Dapi staining is currently the most commonly used method assessing
cell attachment to scaffolds at VOW. Due to the fixation step, this method
involves removing samples from continued culture at the time of staining.
Literature suggests that most live cells stained with Hoechst or Dapi remain
viable in continued culture however we have not confirmed if this is the case
with DOLLY12 cells. If we find this to be the case with DOLLY12 cells, live
Hoechst and Dapi staining may provide an alternative method for assessing cell
attachment and viability, without the need to terminate stained samples. This
would allow us to utilise the same samples to assess cell viability across
multiple time points, reducing replicate requirements. This will be of
particular benefit when moving into DOE where we will have high sample
demands.


Hypothesis


  1. 7 days after staining, DOLLY12 cells stained with Hoechst will have a survival rate equal to that of unstained cells.    
  2. 7 days after staining, DOLLY12 cells stained with Dapi will have a survival rate equal to that of unstained cells.        


Method/Procedure

  1. Thaw DOLLY12 cells and grow in continual culture (to be performed by cell availability) 
  2. Prepare Zein samples.
  3. Plate and EPL coat zein samples.
  4. Harvest cells and seed onto zein scaffolds as well as gelatin coated culture dishes.
  5. D1 Hoechst + Dapi stain samples in treatment groups +image. 100% feed of all samples 
  6. D2 change to E6 media + imaging of samples to observe residual staining. 
  7. D3 100% feed of all samples + imaging of samples to observe residual staining. 
  8. D4 100% feed of all samples + imaging of samples to observe residual staining. 
  9. D5 100% feed of all samples + imaging of samples to observe residual staining. 
  10. D6 100% feed of all samples + imaging of samples to observe residual staining. 
  11. D7 Live dapi staining of all samples to obtain dead cell estimates, followed by fix and repeat dapi stain to obtain total cell estimates. 


