

LINK TO CLUBHOUSE EPIC PAGE:
https://app.clubhouse.io/vowfood/epic/15691/epicxxxxx-demonstration-of-the-
use-of-biostat-a-2-l-bioreactor-for-musc-expansion  
  
LINK TO AIRTABLE ENTRY:
https://airtable.com/tblg6twoOUgW08iLA/viwK5Elaw1pIYYJug/recBdbqKRPjNkudIs

AIM/PURPOSE: To train users in the operation of the Biostat A 2 L bioreactor,
to demonstrate its use for MuSC cell expansion over 4-5 days, to document
protocols for the operation of the Biostat A for MuSC cell expansion.

HYPOTHESIS: That the Biostat A will require fewer manual operations during the
routine expansion of MuSC cells. That MuSC cells can be seeded, proliferated
and harvested from the Biostat using substantially similar methods as what is
used in flask culture.

RESULTS SUMMARY: Seeding, feeding and sampling of microcarrier culture was
greatly simplified in the Biostat as compared to flask cultures, and MuSC
proliferation on microcarriers was observed. However, harvesting was slow and
complicated and, despite apparently good cell detachment from the
microcarriers, this first attempt recovered only 2.5% of the cells in culture.  

Figure 1: (a) Photograph of bioreactor setup; (b) Violin plot showing
frequency distribution, median, range and quartiles of cells/microcarrier
counts; (c) Scatter plot showing mean cell counts and standard deviations;
and, Blue fluorescence micrographs of cell nuclei on microcarriers, taken with
a Basler camera mounted on a Zeiss Axiovert microscope at 5x objective (d)
before harvest and (e) after harvest.





CONCLUSIONS:

The Biostat A was assembled, autoclaved and setup. A cell-free batch of
microcarriers was successfully loaded and operated over 5 days in the
bioreactor. The major problems with the initial operating procedures were
identifed and fixed for use in subsequent bioreactor operations. The
bioreactor was then used for the first cell culture batch, which was
successfully operated without contamination over 6 days. Operating procedures
in lab book template format were developed for:  
  
    Assembly and sterilization  
    Setup and sterility test  
    Batch initiation and operation  
    Sampling  
    Shutdown and cleaning  
  
Cells were detached from the microcarriers using Trypsin, however only 2.5% of
the cells were recovered in the supernatant. Development of an operating
procedure for efficient harvesting was not successful.

NEXT STEPS:

  * The bioreactor will be used to expand myogenic stem cell clones over the next 2 months as a demonstration of capability.
  * Further research into harvesting will be done, including literature search and testing incremental changes to the existing protocol, in order to develop a harvesting protocol in lab book template format. The key goal will be to minimize temperature and pH fluctuations, and cycle time, and to maximize cell recovery from the reactor vessel, during harvesting.
  * After this time, enough evidence will have been gathered to make decisions about further bioreactor purchases.  


  


