

Key Findings

  1. Fibroblasts taken from the supernatant of adherent culture did not proliferate in static suspension culture. 
  2. Cell clumping and high levels of debris were observed later than we have typically seen during agitated suspension adaptation. This is likely due to the lack of shear stress which is placed on cells in agitated suspension culture, and is a positive sign for this method of suspension adaptation. 
  3. The adherent culture from which the supernatant was removed was terminated shortly after, due to cell apoptosis. It is therefore difficult to draw conclusions around why our cells did not survive in static suspension culture, as they may have been non-viable from Day 0.  




Discussion

During typical adherent cell culture, cells which detach and float away from
the flask surface are discarded during feeds and passaged. The cells which
remain in culture are therefore those which naturally have a tendency to
adhere firmly to the plasticware. Between passages and feeds, it is typical to
see a number of cells which have become detached and are floating in the
growth medium. If these cells are viable, separating them from the adherent
culture and supporting their growth could generate a suspension-adapted
population. This hypothesis was tested by Takano et al (1959), who
successfully adapted HeLa and L strain cells to suspension via this method. We
trialled this method with our F_NANDO3 cell line in an attempt to adapt it to
suspension.

The entire supernatant (30 mL) was removed from 1 x T175 containing adherent
chicken fibroblasts (EPIC 22898). The medium was centrifuged, resuspended in 5
mL of medium, and moved into a fresh flask. On day 4, the cells were
centrifuged, fed with 5 mL fresh medium, counted, and re-plated. This was
repeated every 4 days. While Takano et al. observed that a proportion of cells
would adhere after being re-plated, unless the vessel was siliconised. On the
contrary, our chicken fibroblasts remained entirely in suspension. This
suggested that the cells may not be viable. It was difficult to determine this
conclusively during counts, as they seemed to retain their morphology and
membrane, but also appeared to be absorbing the Trypan blue stain (Figure 1).
Takano et al found that the HeLa cells began proliferating immediately after
being introduced to suspension, whereas the L strain cells initially dropped
in numbers before proliferating at Day 4. The chicken fibroblasts were
maintained in suspension with regular feeds and counts for 28 days, however
the population continued to decline and began to form necrotic cell clumps.
The culture was therefore terminated.

Figure 1: Phase, 10X, Fibroblasts on haemocytometer slide. Cells appeared
darker in colour after Trypan blue staining, however they retained their round
morphology and appeared to have intact membranes

To investigate why we were unable to replicate Takano et al's results, the
state of the adherent culture from which these cells were taken was checked.
It was discovered that those cells were discarded ~7 days after the
supernatant was removed, as they had stopped growing and begun senescing
(Figure 2). Given the high rate of cell senescence and death in this adherent
culture, it is likely that the fibroblasts collected from the supernatant were
mostly if not entirely non-viable from Day 0. We were unable to find papers to
support Takano et al's findings, however given the simplicity of the design
and the low effort required, it is worth re-trying with a sturdier cell line.

Figure 2: Phase, 10X. Chicken fibroblasts in the adherent culture from which
the supernatant was removed, 7 days post-passage.








Limitations

  1. No replicates 
  2. The cell line used (F_NANDO3) has been observed to grow very slowly and senesce at low passage numbers. The specific culture form which these cells were split was discarded 6 days after the passage due to high rates of cell senescence and lack of growth. It is therefore likely that these cells were either non-viable to begin with or entered apoptosis shortly after the supernatant was moved. 
  3. DMEM/F12 was used as a basal medium which, owing to the presence of magnesium and calcium, can cause excessive cell clumping in suspension cultures. 




Conclusion

NANDO fibroblasts from the supernatant of adherent culture were unable to
proliferate in static suspension culture. However, these cells came from a
culture which was terminated shortly after due to high rates of cell death, so
it is difficult to ascertain the exact reason for the failure of this
experiment.  




Future Directions

I believe this experiment is worth repeating, due to the low risk & effort /
high reward nature of the process. We also cannot conclusively say whether
this is a viable method or not, as our cells were likely non-viable from the
start. If we repeat this experiment, we should:

  1. Have multiple conditions with cells from different cultures and different cell lines with multiple replicates 
  2. Trial different basal media to reduce clumping e.g. CD CHO or RPMI rather than DMEM/F12




References

Takano, K., Yamada, M. & Yaginuma, K., 1959, Training HeLa and L strain cells
to grow in fluid-suspension, Jap. J. M. Sc. & Biol., vol 12, 343-354.
https://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/article/yoken1952/12/5/12_5_343/_pdf


