

https://www.thespruceeats.com/what-is-seitan-3376819

@herbifoods

' VEGAN "CHICKEN" WINGS

(The recipe is inspired by @rosakochtgruen)

⠀

RECIPE:

3 cups flour

1 cup water

spice mix (smoked paprika, garlic powder, onion powder, pepper, a pinch of
cinnamon)

Veggie broth

rice paper

2 tbsp bbq sauce

1 tbsp olive oil

⠀

❶ Mix flour with water, knead well for about 10 minutes (you're done when it
bounces back after you poke it with a finger) and soak it in cold water for
about an hour.

❷ Wash out the starch. Swap out the water 3-4 times until the water gets only
a little bit milky.

❸ Add the spices of your choice, kneed again and let it sit for another 20-45
minutes.

❹ Now you can stretch the dough, twist it and form a knot.

❺ Optionally fry the seitan knot in a little bit of oil until brown and
crispy. Then add some broth and let it simmer for about 45 minutes.

❻ To make vegan "chicken" wings from this, rip it into pieces. Cut some rice
paper in half, dip it into water and wrap up your "chicken" pieces. Cover with
a mixture of bbq sauce and oil and bake it for 15-20 minutes at 200°C/400F in
the oven.Follow

@herbifoods

for even more delicious vegan recipes! (edited)

  




Background notes:

  * Many recipes include stocks, flavours, spices to flavour the seitan for eating purposes 
  * Many recipes include additional ingredients like tofu, jackfruit, to soften seitan for eating purposes 
  * Different time of kneading and rinsing will result in varying textures 
  * High heat or overcooking will result in a more rubbery texture 
  * Texture will develop more after being stored in the fridge 
  * Resting after wash will allow gluten to develop and become more stretchy

Seitan will become extra stretchy when enough starch is removed




Materials

Wheat flour:

  * 200 g all purpose flour 
  * 150 mL water

Wheat flour + gluten :

  * 150 g all purpose flour
  * 50g gluten
  * 150 mL water

Gluten:

  * 100g gluten
  * 200 mL water 

  

  * Additional water for heating 
  * Additional water for filling specimen jar 
  * Scalpel 
  * 3 x 500 - 1L beaker
  * Stirrer 
  * Tweezer 
  * 27 x Specimen jars 
  * large bowl 
  * scales 
  * measuring cylinder 
  * sieve or colander 
  * 100 mm culture plate

  

Reference

https://thevietvegan.com/washed-flour-seitan-method/

https://seitansociety.com/wash-the-flour-method/

  

Method

  1. In a large bowl, combine  flour and water and knead 10 - 15 minutes until a smooth ball forms (it should spring back when you poke it )
  2. Repeat for  gluten and wheat + gluten samples
  3. For samples containg wheat flour, cover sample with cool water and leave to incubate at RT for 1 - 2 hours 
  4. Remove excess water and cover ball with fresh cold water 
  5. Knead in water to remove starch. When water is opaque and thickens, remove and replace with fresh water 
  6. repeat rinse until a spongey mass is obtained (dough should cling together well and water should be cloudy but not opaque)
  7.  squeeze out remaining water and allow seitan to rest in a colander to drain (20 - 30 minutes) 
  8. Weigh each sample
    1. Wheat flour: 85.3 g 
    2. What flour + gluten: 166 g
    3. Gluten: 253 g
  9. Separate out 6 x ~10 g pieces from each sample
  10. Knead sampled into one another to form "fibers"
  11.  ~~Divide seitan into 2 even pieces. further divide each piece into 9 pieces and form long strands.  ~~
  12.  ~~Braid strands, then pull to stretch and form a large knot. (this process will form fibers similar to pulled chicken) - refer to image  ~~
  13. Fill beakers half way with water (500 mL) and heat at the following temperatures: 
    1.  70 degrees for 20 minutes, 40 minutes, 60 minutes, 80 minutes, 100 minutes
    2.  ~~  80 degrees for 20 minute, 40 minutes, 1hr~~
  14. Adjusted temp to 80 degrees C after the 10 minute mark
  15. Remove samples at given timepoints with a tweezer and transfer onto a 6 well plate
  16.  Allow to cool  (20 minutes), before cutting in half with a scalpel 
  17. Carefully transfer one half into a labelled specimen jar and cover with enough water to submerge sample.
  18. Store in refrigerator for further examination after >4Hr of refrigeration 
  19. With remaining piece, examine and record observations. 
  20.  Shred sample and transfer these into labelled specimen jar and cover with enough water to submerge sample. 
  21.  Place these in the fridge for further observation after >4hr of refrigeration
  22.  After observing samples, select suitable samples (cut into pieces if needed) to autoclave for use in cell culture 

  

Results and observations

20 minutes after removing from heat

Temperature (degree)Time heating (minute)Softness/Hardness Any fibers observed
after shredding ?  
Please describe (length, thickness) Appearance of cross section after
cuttingAny other observations  
Wheat flour20 soft but firm, structure bounces back slowly when pokedno -
rather stretchydense - small and scattered poursvery sticky, undercook, soft
and squishy, dense and stretchy  
Wheat flour + gluten20soft by firm. structure bounces back quickly when
pokedno - rather stretchydense - small and scattered pours  
  
very sticky, undercook, soft and squishy, dense and stretchy (similar to gum)  
Gluten20soft.  structure bounces back slowly when pokedno - breaks apart easy
when stretcheddense - small and scattered pours  
  
very sticky, undercook, soft and squishy, dense and stretchy (similar to gum)  
Wheat flour40soft but firm, structure bounces back  when poked  
  
no - rather stretchy  
  
dense - small and scattered pours  
  
very sticky, undercook, soft and squishy, dense and stretchy (similar to gum)  
Wheat flour + gluten40soft but firm, structure bounces back  when pokedno -
rather stretchy  
  
dense - small and scattered pours  
  
very sticky, undercook, soft and squishy, dense and stretchy (similar to gum)  
Gluten40soft, structure bounces back slowly  when pokedno - rather stretchy  
  
dense - small and scattered pours  
  
very sticky, undercook, soft and squishy, dense and stretchy (similar to gum)  
Wheat flour60firm, bouncysome fibers - shortdense - small and scattered
pourscuts easy - cannot stretch  
Wheat flour + gluten60firm and a bit stickynot really - stretchesdense - small
and scattered pourscuts easy- stretchy but breaks easy  
Gluten60soft and squishy, slightly firmnot really - stretches  dense - small
and scattered pourscuts easy  
Wheat flour80firmsome fibers - shortdense - small and scattered pourscuts easy
- cannot stretch  
Wheat flour + gluten80firmsome fibers - shortdense - small and scattered
pourscuts easy - slight stretch but breaks easy  
Gluten80firm but squishysome fibers - shortdense - small and scattered
pourscuts easy -  stretches  slightly  
Wheat flour100firmsome fibers - shortdense - small and scattered pourscuts
easy, not stretchy  
Wheat flour + gluten100firmsome fibers - shortdense - small and scattered
pourscuts easy - not strechy  
Gluten100soft and squishysome fibers - shortdense - small and scattered
pourscuts easy - slight stretchy  
  
  

Half sample after refrigeration

Temperature (degree)Time heating (minute)Softness/Hardness Appearance (colour,
shine)Any fibers observed after shredding ?  
Please describe (length, thickness) Appearance of cross section after
cuttingAny other observations  
Wheat flour20 Soft, squishy, mostly returns to original shape when pushedQuite
smooth, blobby sphere, quite sticky, gummyElastic, large fibres appear as you
pull, tears nicelysmooth surface, tiny pores  
  
Wheat flour + gluten20Soft, squishy, slightly denser/harder than wheat
flourLess sticky, smoothElastic but a bit less so than wheat floursmooth
surface, tiny pores  
  
Gluten20soft, squishySticky, smooth with a bit of pebbly topography, slimy
appearanceElastic, tears in one quick motion rather than slowly in
fibressmooth surface, tiny pores  
  
Wheat flour40Soft, squishySmooth, a little dense, stickyElastic but tears
quite quickly, fibres develop on slow tearingsmooth surface, tiny pores  
  
Wheat flour + gluten40Soft, squishy, slightly denser/harder than wheat
flourLess sticky, smooth, rubbery  
  
Difficult to pull apart, not very elastic, tears in one motion rather than
slowly in fibressmooth surface, tiny pores  
  
Gluten40Soft, very squishyLess sticky, pebbly topography, slimy
appearanceElastic, tears more slowly than 20 degrees, fibres visible on
tearingsmooth surface, tiny pores  
  
Wheat flour60Quite firm, dense, smooth, rubberySmooth, dense, stickySome
fibres on pulling, breaks apart rather than stretches, very thin organised
fibressmooth surface, tiny pores  
  
  
  
Wheat flour + gluten60Still soft and squishySmooth with a little bit of
roughnessSome fibres on pulling, strethes a little but rips easilysmooth
surface, tiny pores  
  
Gluten60Still soft and squishyPebbly, spongeyEasy to tear, elastic, long
fibres develop  
  
smooth surface, tiny pores  
  
Wheat flour80Very dense and rubbery. Firm.Smooth, a little dense, no longer
stickySome fibres on pulling, breaks apart rather than stretches, very thin
organised fibressmooth surface, tiny pores  
  
Wheat flour + gluten80Quite dense and rubberySmooth with a little bit of
roughnessSome fibres on pulling, strethes a little but rips easilysmooth
surface, some larger pores  
  
Gluten80A little firmer but still squishyPebbly, spongeyEasy to tear, elastic,
long fibres developsmooth surface, tiny pores  
  
Wheat flour100Quite dense, feels like firm cooked chicken thighBeige, smooth
almost shiny surface, held circular shapeSome fibres on pulling, breaks apart
rather than stretches, very thin organised fibresSmooth glossy surface on
cutting, no pores  
  
Wheat flour + gluten100Dense but less dense than the wheat flourBeige, less
smooth than the wheat flour samplesSome fibres on pulling, strethes a little
but rips easilySmooth glossy surface on cutting, no pores  
  
Gluten100Squishier than other samples, less dense, less resistant to
pushingBeige, porous "pebbly" appearance, looks a bit like minced chicken
meatComprised of more fibres than the others, stretches quite thin before
breaking, looks like a disorganised networkSmooth surface with a few pores
visible  
  
Wheat flour110Dense, rubbery, like a bouncy ballBeige, smooth surfaceSome
fibres on pulling, breaks apart rather than stretches, very thin organised
fibres, difficult to pull apartSmooth surface, a few (very few!) pores visible  
  
Wheat flour + gluten110  
  
Less dense but still rubbery, easier to push againstSmooth but a bit rougher
looking than the wheat glutenPulls further than the wheat flour, thin fibres
develop, still a bit difficult to pull apartSome pores visible, smooth surface  
  
Gluten110Soft, yields when pushed but still bounces back to original
shapePebbly, like minced chickenLots of disorganise/random fibres. Stretches
further than the other samples.More pores visible, still smooth surface  
  
  
  

  

  

  

Image:

  





