

About: Konjac is a plant common in Asia. It is a polysaccharide and belongs to
the family of glucomannan. The plant is known for its starchy corm, a tuber-
like part of the stem that grows underground. The corm is grounded and used to
make a rich source of soluble dietary fiber (glucomannan). Konjac is used as a
gelatin substitute and to thicken or add texture to foods. Other common names
for Konjac are devils tongue, voodoo lily and elephant yam and glucomannan.

In water, konjac glucomannan dissolves and forms highly viscous, pseudoplastic
solutions. When this viscous solution is exposed to heat and diluted with
alkali it transforms konjac into a heat stable gel that remains unaffected by
acid and salt also.

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5713220/

https://patents.google.com/patent/US20070065558A1/en

  

Background on method

The method for transforming konjac glucomannan solutions into heat-stable gels
requires the use of heat and a high pH to deacetylate the konjac glucomannan
molecule. A minimum concentration of 1.5-2% konjac glucomannan is necessary to
adjust the system to a pH of approximately 9.0.

When the solution is heated to 85° C. with a mild alkali condition (pH 9-10)
it forms a gel which is unaffected by heat. Thus, the gel remains stable when
additional heat is applied and remains unchanged under repeated heating at
100° C. or even at 200° C. Alternatively, the addition of an alkali, like
Ca(OH)2 in a konjac glucomannan solution removes its acetyl group forming a
stable network structure to form the gel structure. By mixing the konjac
glucomannan soluble fiber, with any kind of insoluble fibers and alkalis
together, a pure fiber konjac gel food can be made by simply pouring the
complex powder into water applying heat. The traditional konjac gel foods
texture is hard, chewy and rubbery, the new gel foods in which the insoluble
fiber is added improves the texture of the gel foods.

Konjac has more recently become popular as a vegan seafood alternative.

It can be incorporated into plant based versions of seafood. For Chinese
cooking, thin strands of konjac gel can be used as substitute for shark fins
when preparing a plant-based version of shark fin soup, as well as
alternatives for calamari and shrimp. Wherein, the Konjac is combined with
starches spices and paprika for colour.

  


