

## Completed by: Shaleen Sharma  


Aim/Purpose


To automate the feed and immunostaining workflow central to any
differentiation/maturation study and provide the framework to increase the
throughput of our individual studies three-fold.


Hypothesis


The vast majority of the manual workflow of feeding and immunostaining will be
able to be successfully translated to an automated platform. The automated
process will be more precise and efficient than the manual workflow and
significant time-savings will be achieved.


Technical Gap


By introducing liquid handling automation, we can free up the bandwidth of our
scientists to research and develop alternative strategies to increase the
maturation of our muscle. Furthermore, by mitigating the element of manual
pipetting we can widthstand an increase in experiments as the feeding
schedules of these would be automated.

The key technical gap is whether a clear benefit in terms of efficiency,
reliability and accuracy is seen from automating feeds and immunostaining.
Moreover, it is unclear whether the manual workflow can be successfully
translated to the automated platform without affecting the viability and
maturation of our muscle cells.  
  


Method/Procedure
  
  
Figure 1: Overview of EPIC


  
  
Experimental protocol for feed automation:

  * Write protocols for all feeds and immunostaining for 12 well plates and 96 well plates.  

  * Perform water runs for each protocol and note down improvements that can be made.
  * Perform second and subsequent water runs with improved protocols (v2, v3 etc.).
  * Seed two 96 well plates and two 12 well plates with MuSCs.
  * Mature each plate for several days, with one set being feed manually and the other using the OT2.
  * Compare cell viability and MyoG/MF20 signal between the two conditions (automated feeds vs. manual) using automated immunostaining protocols*

*Automated immunostaining has been done previously at Vow and has shown no significant differences between manual and automated workflows (although automated MyoG signal was shown to be slightly higher than manual). See here:  
  
Note that these protocols while different to the experiment linked above,
should be very similar in terms of workflow.


  
  
Figure 3: OT2 deck layout for cell run


  
  
The cell run section of this EPIC will compare the automated and manual media
change/feed process. The above deck layout highlights that both the 12 well
plate and the 96 well plate will be fed in the same protocol daily. The manual
feeding process will be done as has been normally done in the Maturation
project with no changes.




Experimental details

  

12 well plate

96 well plate  
  
Cell type

C2C12

C2C12  
  
Number of plates

2

2  
  
Working volume for each well

2mL

120uL  
  
Expected seed date

15/10/21

15/10/21  
  
Number of wells seeded

12 (all)

96 (all)  
  
Proliferation period

2 days (over weekend)

2 days (over weekend)  
  
Proliferation media required

26mL (both plates)

15mL (both plates)  
  
Seeding density (cells/well)

20,000

2500  
  
Total cells required

480,000 cells

480,000 cells  
  
Maturation period

4 days (Mon - Thurs)

4 days (Mon - Thurs)  
  
Differentiation start date

18/10/21

18/10/21  
  
E6 media requirements (daily)

28mL each plate

14mL each plate  
  
Total E6 requirements

224mL

112mL  
  
Markers of success

  * DAPI count comparison
  * MyoG/MF20 signal
  * Time savings
  * Variability within conditions

  * DAPI count comparison
  * MyoG/MF20 signal
  * Time savings
  * Variability within conditions


