Brief Background


The electrical impulse muscle tissue receives from the nervous system is well
known to be one of the most important cues for functional muscle development,
and physically active bioreactors which utilise electrical stimulation have
been shown to enhance maturation of muscle cells (Donnelly et al., 2010). To
test the effect of different electrical stimulation patterns on cell growth,
differentiation and maturation, a stimulation setup is required. This system
includes a stimulator and electrodes to deliver the stimulation into the media
of nearby cells. A well-plate culture dish format allows for controls,
replicates and different conditions to be present on the same test plate.
Thus, this EPIC investigates the design and development of an electrical
stimulation system for muscle cell culture.

Electrical stimulation of cells in vitro runs the risk of introducing chemical
byproducts and pH changes to the media. To prevent this from occurring, most
stimulation set ups use salt bridges or balanced, biphasic stimulation
waveforms. However, this is more complicated to implement than a simple
metallic electrode stimulating with direct current (Mobini, 2016). Although
many previous studies (Banan Sadeghian 2018; Khodabukus et al., 2019; Shahin-
Shamsabadi and Selvaganapathy, 2020; Van der Schaft 2013) have demonstrated
improved maturation using stimulation patterns called pulsetrains with
biphasic waveforms, some studies have also shown short exposure periods of
simple DC stimulation can influence cell behaviour, such as proliferation and
differentiation (Mobini, 2016). For this reason, while the infrastructure to
utilise more complex stimulation patterns is being developed, testing in this
EPIC begins with simple DC stimulation. The electrode plate and stimulator
setup is tested to define the limits of stimulation amplitude without inducing
electrolysis, as well as general functionality and usability of the system.


Key Results


A simple manufacturing method was established to integrate metal electrodes
into the lid of a typical plastic 12WP culture dish to form an electrode-
plate. 1.6 mm diameter stainless steel wire was cut and bent into L shaped
metal electrodes. These were embedded into the lid by drilling holes into the
plastic and pushing the electrodes through, before sealing any gaps with
household silicone (Figure 1A). This electrode plate is unable to be
sterilised using high temperatures, however the lid construction proved
successful to withstand sterilisation using 70% ethanol spray and 1 hr
exposure to UV light (Figure 1B). Electrolysis tests of less than 1 hour with
a DC power supply (Figure 1C) showed large amounts of electrolysis at the
electrode-electrolyte interface of the anode, using 2 V/cm, indicated by large
amounts of gas formation and changes in colour of the media around the same
electrode. Accumulation of organic matter was present at the cathode, while
blackening and pitting of the electrode surface, indicating severe electrode
dissolution, was present at the anode (Figure 1E). 1 V/cm also showed similar
indications of electrolysis and electrode dissolution, while 0.5 V/cm
indicated it may be an appropriate voltage for this electrode set up, with no
gas bubble formation at the anode or pH indicator colour change within the
well. The electrode lid was easily connected to a stimulation source within an
incubator using spring loaded hook test clips (Figure 1D). Overnight
stimulation using a DC power supply with 0.25 V/cm showed no indication of
electrolysis. No gas bubble formation or pH indicator colour change was
visible within the well. 0.5 V/cm showed indications of electrolysis at the
anode, with gas bubble formation and media colour change visible around the
same electrode. 1 V/cm showed observable changes to the media and the
electrode, with a thick, black substance present in the well, particularly
around the anode (Figure 1F). Electrode inspection after cleaning the
electrode plate revealed some indications of dissolution to the electrodes
delivering 0.5 V/cm and clear indications of severe dissolution to the
electrodes delivering 1 V/cm.  
  
The StimJim stimulator demonstrated it could achieve pulsetrains which are
consistent with some of those in past literature, and this did not result in
any visible observations of electrolysis for tests of less than 1 hour.
However, it was established the StimJim can not do intermittent pulsetrains
with resting periods, the stimulation output is constant. This system was
found to otherwise integrate well with the electrode-plate and an
oscilloscope, which displayed the pulsetrain waveform (Figure 1G). The
waveform parameters measured using the oscilloscope, such as pulse width and
frequency, were consistent with the programmed output parameters. The
amplitude of the waveform measured using the oscilloscope (Figure 1H) was also
consistent with the feedback recorded from the stimulator, indicating the data
obtained using the onboard measurement system within the StimJim is accurate.
This stimulator was found to be capable of customising many of the stimulator
parameters used in previous literature, and could control the output for two
independent stimulation channels.




Figure 1: Constructing and preliminary testing a electrical stimulation system
for a 12WP culture dish. A) Sealing embedded stainless steel electrodes into a
plastic culture dish lid using silicone to form an electrode plate. B) UV
sterilisation of the electrode plate after spraying with 70% ethanol. C) DC
power supply stimulator setup to produce 3 different voltages using 10K Ohm
potentiometers. D) The electrode plate connected within an incubator using
hook test clips and a lead wire to the stimulation source outside the
incubator. E) Organic residue and dissolution marks on the surfaces of an
electrode pair 15 mm apart subjected to 2 V/cm stimulation. F) Four
stimulation conditions showing increasing rates of electrode dissolution and
electrolysis with increasing voltages. Each column is a separate condition,
with stimulation amplitudes, from left to right, of 0.25, 0.5, 1 and 0 V/cm.
G) A stimulator setup using the StimJim and an oscilloscope connected to an
electrode plate for electrolysis tests. H) Verifcation tests using the
oscilloscope to measure the stimulation parameters of the StimJim showed the
stimulation output is as expected and the StimJim internal measurement system
is accurate.




Discussion


In this study, an electrode plate was developed which could be connected to
multiple stimulators and used with a 12 WP culture dish format. The approach
taken to develop this system was using cheap materials and minimal hardware,
to aid in the scalability of the system at Vow. The electrode plate was
incorporated into the plastic lid of the culture dish and used spring-loaded
hook test-clips to connect the electrodes to a lead wire, which allowed for
the culture dish to be stimulated inside an incubator, while the stimulator
remained on the bench. Two types of stimulators were trialed with the
electrode plate, a DC power supply and the StimJim, an open source stimulator
capable of producing pulsetrains with customisable biphasic waveforms. The
electrode plate was found to be sterilisable with 70% ethanol spray and one
hour of UV light exposure. It was established the DC power supply had a
voltage amplitude limit of 0.25 V/cm for the constructed electrode plate,
which utilised 1.6 mm diameter L-shaped stainless steel electrodes separated
15 mm within the culture well. Any higher stimulation amplitudes utilised for
periods of 12 hours or more resulted in visible gas formation, biochemical
reactions and pH changes as a result of electrolysis, as well as visible
electrode dissolution, indicated by pitting and black marks on the electrode
surface. Another stimulator, the StimJim, was able to be connected to the
electrode plate. This allowed for more complex stimulation parameters, with
customisable pulsetrains which could utilise charge-balanced biphasic
waveforms.

This study indicated that a safe voltage using a simple DC power supply with
stainless steel 1.6 mm diameter wire L-shaped electrodes is less than 0.5
V/cm, with 0.25 V/cm showing no indication of pH changes or electrode
dissolution after one night of stimulation. This stimulation amplitude is
higher than some that used in some studies, such as 0.07 V/cm (Serena et al.,
2008). However, it is substantially lower than the voltage ranges used in many
other studies, such as 2 V/cm (Ko et al., 2018), 4 V/cm (van der Schaft et
al., 2013) and 5 V/cm (Shahin-Shamsabadi et a., 2020). However, all of these
previous studies either used biphasic charge balanced waveforms or a salt
bridge to prevent unwanted biochemical reactions from occurring. In a similar
method to the DC power supply stimulation experiment in this EPIC, one study
used a constant DC power supply without the use of a salt bridge or charge
balanced waveform to stimulate cells immersed in culture media. Using platinum
(Pt) L-shaped electrodes, 1 V/cm was the maximum voltage which could be used
without observing substantial electrode dissolution or gas formation and pH
excursions (Mobini et al., 2018). This is higher than the 0.25 V/cm maximum
voltage observed in the current experiment. This difference may be due to the
electrode material used, with the experiments in this EPIC using stainless
steel electrodes rather than Pt. Stainless steel L-shaped wire electrodes have
also been used in previous literature without observing negative effects to
the cells or surrounding media, however a charged balanced biphasic waveform
was used to minimise harmful effects (Donnelly et al., 2010). Higher voltages
used in the current study, such as 1-2 V/cm, produced phenomena consistent
with common and expected irreversible processes encountered when using
stimulation electrodes, such as electrolysis of water, indicated by the
consequent formation of gas and pH changes. Marks on the electrode surface
were also consistent with signs of electrode dissolution, the breakdown of
passivity, and pitting or transpassive corosion, which is typical of stainless
steel electrodes (Cogan, 2008).  

The traditional choice of conductive materials for electrodes in contact with
tissue is metals. Titanium, Pt and platinum-iridium (PtIr) have been
demonstrated as biocompatible in cochlear implants. Nickle-titanium shape
memory alloys also have good biocompatibility. Stainless steel and nickel-
chromium have also been shown to be non-toxic. However, copper and silver are
unacceptable as stimulating electrodes, since these metals can cause tissue
necrosis even in the absence of current (Merrill et al., 2005). Stainless
steel electrodes are substantially cheaper than nobel metals like Pt and Ir,
so for scaling out and increasing experiment throughput, stainless steel is
the preferred electrode material. The L-shape of the electrodes used in this
study was chosen in comparison to a straight wire electrode to increase the
surface area of the electrode for the chosen wire-based electrode material,
hence decreasing the charge density for a given charge injection (Cogan,
2008). Stainless steel electrodes have been used in previous literature to
stimulate 2D and 3D C2C12 myoblasts, with results indicating improved
maturation (Donnelly et al., 2010). Stainless steel electrodes have also been
used to stimulate primary myoblasts and improve their myogenic potential
(Serena et al., 2008). Pt is a material which has also been used in previous
in vitro stimulation studies (Mobini et al, 2016; Naumann and Pette, 1994).
However PtIr has a lower impedance than Pt (Geddes and Roeder, 2003), allowing
for higher voltages to be used before causing electrode dissolution or
unwanted biochemical reactions. Alloying Pt with only 10% Ir has been shown to
increase the charge injection capacitance by 66%. Thus, future studies may
consider integrating PtIr wire electrodes into the electrode plate instead of
stainless steel and comparing the effects of using the different electrode
materials on cell growth, differentiation and maturation. Commercial electrode
plates such as the Ionoptox C-Pace use porous carbon electrodes and can be
used with similar well plate formats and stimulation patterns, however the
cost of this system is more than 20x the cost of the current system used in
this study (see the Stimulator Research page). This is why many commercial
systems are unable to be scaled out to enable higher throughput studies, and
why this study investigates building a complete system in-house.

The StimJim stimulator was found to be capable of reproducing stimulation
parameters used in previous literature (van der Schaft et al., 2013) and
satisfies most of the stimulator requirements established in Q2 at Vow (0 -
100 mV/cm and 2 - 10 V/cm experiments, biphasic signal, 0 - 100 Hz). However
substantial electrolysis testing of the StimJim with these stimulation
parameters was not conducted. This stimulator was chosen over other
stimulators due to its substantially lower cost than competitors, and its
standout features, such as the integrated voltage measurement system, which
provides feedback on the actual voltage drop across the electrodes in the
well. However, preliminary testing of the StimJim has been unable to
incorporate a rest period into the pulse train, or produce intermittent
stimulation bursts. Previous literature indicates the work-rest ratio could be
an important component of the stimulation pattern required to induce
differentiation and maturation of myoblasts (Naumann and Pete, 1993; Donnelly
et al., 2010). More investigation is required to understand if this parameter
can be incorporated into the StimJim with some modification to the firmware.
Another alternative route to incorporating the rest period parameter into
future studies is to use the Pulse Pal 2 for pulsetrains where a work-rest
ratio is desired. The Pulse Pl 2 is another open source stimulator, which
appears to feature this function, however it does not have an integrated
measurement system, is not electrically isolated, and does not have a current
output mode (see the Stimulator Research page). It should be noted the
disadvantage of no integrated measurement within the Pulse Pal 2 could be
overcome by using the oscilloscope to read the actual pulse amplitudes
injected into the media, however this would not be as simple as the StimJim's
automatic feedback.

Two methods of UV sterilisation for the electrode plate were trialed in this
study, using either the portable UV lamp or the UV lights built into the BSC.
While both methods indicated successful sterilisation capabilities, previous
literature (Bryant et al., 2021) indicates higher sterilisation effectiveness
with longer exposure times and decreasing distance between the UV light source
and the sample. Thus, it is recommended that at a minimum, the portable UV
lamp is used for at least one hour to sterilise the electrode plate after
spraying with 70% ethanol, instead of using the BSC lamps. This is because the
portable UV lamp is closer to the sample than those in the BSC. It is unknown
how many sterilisation cycles the electrode plate will be capable of
withstanding using this protocol, or if the UV exposure will degrade the
silicone sealant and plastic culture lid over time. Using 70% ethanol and UV
for sterilisation is consistent with methods used to sterilise commercial
systems, such as the Ionoptix C-Pace (van der Schaft, 2013). However, the
C-Pace is typically soaked in 70% ethanol while being UV sterilised, rather
than sprayed with 70% ethanol before sterilisation. This may be in part due to
the porous electrodes used in the C-Pace system. The results in this EPIC
indicate soaking the metal electrodes of the electrode plate at Vow is
unnecessary.


Limitations


\- Although no electrolysis was observed when using the StimJim, the
electrolysis voltage tests used to test the DC power supply stimulation system
were not completed to the same extent for the StimJim biphasic pulsetrain
stimulation system as well, so direct voltage comparisons of the two
stimulation systems could not be made.

\- Limited pulsetrain and waveform stimulation patterns were developed in this
study using the StimJim to compare with those in previous literature.

\- No biological testing was conducted in this study to determine the effects
of the electrical stimulation on cells.

\- The data obtained from the sterilisation tests is not robust, since the
experiments used antibiotics in the media or no pH indicator was used in the
media to aid in detecting contamination. The experiment durations were short
and inspection for contamination was only conducted by eye or under a phase
microscope.

\- No further examination of the electrodes was conducted post electrolysis
testing to determine the nature of the organic substance accumulation on the
electrode surface. No testing was conducted to determine the gas produced at
the electrode-electrolyte interface was indeed hyrdrogen gas and no further
analysis of the media was conducted, other than observing changes in pH
indicated by the media colour change.  


Conclusion


In this study, an electrical stimulation system was developed for a 12WP
culture dish to integrate into the biological testing of myoblasts at Vow,
with the aim of improving maturation of the muscle cells. The system includes
a 12WP culture dish lid with embedded stainless steel L-shaped electrodes and
a leadwire with spring-loaded hook clips to connect individual channels to
their designated electrode pins. This system allows flexibility in experiment
design and is easy to produce and iterate on. Two methods of stimulation
tested with this electrode plate were that from a DC power supply and more
complex pulsetrains from an open source stimulator called the StimJim. It was
established that only 0.25 V/cm could be used for overnight stimulation with
the DC power supply before inducing electrolysis and electrode dissolution.
The StimJim could reproduce pulsetrains found in previous literature, however
it was not able to incorporate a work-rest ratio, which may be an important
parameter to include in future system capabilities. The electrode plate
designed and built in this study was successfully sterilised using a simple
protocol of 70% ethanol spray and UV sterilisation, ensuring the system is
ready for biological studies. The electrical impulse muscle tissue receives
from the nervous system is well known to be one of the most important cues for
functional muscle development, and electrical stimulation systems such as the
one designed in this study will enable Vow to develop physically active
bioreactors which encourage myoblast maturation and improve the quality of the
meat we produce.


Future Directions


Future studies should include biological stimulation testing with the
stainless steel electrode plate. Stimulation using the StimJim should aim to
replicate the parameters from previous literature and aim to induce the same
effects on maturation observed in those studies. Stimulation using the DC
power supply could also be investigated further using biological studies, but
limiting the amplitude to 0.25 V/cm and including daily media changes. Further
investigation and testing of stimulation parameters for the StimJim are
required. A 'rest' parameter should be integrated into the system if possible,
or a secondary system which can include a work-rest ratio parameter should be
also investigated, such as the Pulse Pal 2. Improvements or alterations to the
electrode plate should include using Pt electrodes to compare them with
stainless steel to determine if there is any difference in biological results,
such as rates of differentiation, maturation or apoptosis. To improve
usability, the test hook clips could be replaced with a single connection port
on the electrode plate for the lead wire. Using other materials for the plate
which can withstand higher temperatures than the plastic culture plate lid may
also enable using autoclaving as a sterilisation method and reduce need to
take up valuable BSC space during electrode sterilisation.


References


Bryant, M.T., Degala, H.L., Mahapatra, A.K., Gosukonda, R.M. and Kannan, G.,
2021. Inactivation of Escherichia coli K12 by pulsed UV light on goat meat and
beef: microbial responses and modelling. International Journal of Food Science
& Technology, 56(2), pp.563-572.

Cogan, S.F., 2008. Neural stimulation and recording electrodes. Annu. Rev.
Biomed. Eng., 10, pp.275-309.

Donnelly, K., Khodabukus, A., Philp, A., Deldicque, L., Dennis, R.G. and Baar,
K., 2010. A novel bioreactor for stimulating skeletal muscle in vitro. Tissue
Engineering Part C: Methods, 16(4), pp.711-718.

Geddes, L.A. and Roeder, R., 2003. Criteria for the selection of materials for
implanted electrodes. Annals of biomedical engineering, 31(7), pp.879-890.

Ko, U.H., Park, S., Bang, H., Kim, M., Shin, H. and Shin, J.H., 2018.
Promotion of myogenic maturation by timely application of electric field along
the topographical alignment. Tissue Engineering Part A, 24(9-10), pp.752-760.

Merrill, D.R., Bikson, M. and Jefferys, J.G., 2005. Electrical stimulation of
excitable tissue: design of efficacious and safe protocols. Journal of
neuroscience methods, 141(2), pp.171-198.

Mobini, S., Leppik, L. and Barker, J.H., 2016. Direct current electrical
stimulation chamber for treating cells in vitro. Biotechniques, 60(2),
pp.95-98.

Naumann, K. and Pette, D., 1994. Effects of chronic stimulation with different
impulse patterns on the expression of myosin isoforms in rat myotube cultures.
Differentiation, 55(3), pp.203-211.

Serena, E., Flaibani, M., Carnio, S., Boldrin, L., Vitiello, L., De Coppi, P.
and Elvassore, N., 2008. Electrophysiologic stimulation improves myogenic
potential of muscle precursor cells grown in a 3D collagen scaffold.
Neurological research, 30(2), pp.207-214.

Shahin-Shamsabadi, A. and Selvaganapathy, P.R., 2020. Tissue-in-a-Tube: three-
dimensional in vitro tissue constructs with integrated multimodal
environmental stimulation. Materials Today Bio, 7, p.100070.

van der Schaft, D.W., van Spreeuwel, A.C., Boonen, K.J., Langelaan, M.L.,
Bouten, C.V. and Baaijens, F.P., 2013. Engineering skeletal muscle tissues
from murine myoblast progenitor cells and application of electrical
stimulation. Journal of visualized experiments: JoVE, (73).


