

Written by: Tom


Background


A major focus in achieving viable suspension cultures has been the process of
developing a high-throughput platform to analyse large numbers of suspension
cultures (>50) simultaneously. As a result it has become crucial to optimise
separate processes' that enable the pool party team to obtain useful metrics
such as cell numbers, to quantify performance of certain culture conditions.
In the past this has predominantly been fluorescence based such that each
individual culture condition are stained with both a live and dead cell
tracker. These stains generally bind to nuclei acid material present in the
nucleus or converted into a membrane impermeable molecule in the cytoplasm or
organelle capable of florescence. All stained cultures are then imaged under
the respective florescent channels, according to which stain was administered,
using the automated fluorescence microscope system known as Zaber. To obtain
cell counts on the live and dead stained images an image processing tool
called FIJI is utilised to automatically analyse the images to identify
"cells" according to their fluorescence, size and morphology. Despite this
process being semi-automated with minimal human input there have been several
shortcomings during its development, namely the difficulties in obtaining
consistent live/dead staining, and weak fluorescence observed from live cell
stains. Consequently this has made it difficult in obtaining accurate cell
counts using current macro codes. In addition it is unclear if the results
obtained from current FIJI analyses are representative of actual cell numbers.
Therefore in response to this we aim to screen multiple live/dead stains to
identify a combination that produces the most consistent results across
several factors. Furthermore it is also necessary to screen which live/dead
stains can adequately fluorescence such that they can observed on the Zaber
and detected using our current suspension macros.


Key results


The key results are as follows:

  1. Dilution after the initial 30 minute staining period was useful for increasing contrast, and the most optimal dilution ratio was 16x.
  2. All methods tended to underestimate total cell count for freshly thawed cell suspensions
  3. The only staining methods that yielded counts that were close to the Trypan Blue exclusion method for total cells with fresh and >30-day-old cell suspensions were ReadyFlow (Hoechst 33342 formulation for flow cytometry) with Sytox Green (see Figure 5, below) and ReadyFlow with Propidium Iodide
  4. Most methods overestimated the dead cell counts except for Calcein AM with Propidium Iodide and ReadyProbes (Hoechst 33342 formulation for fluorescence microscopy) with Sytox Green.

The raw data is collated here:
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1yy1XKdkhQpvGd8ObtqlXxbJPKwWdE9kFq9Bg5LUmVak/edit?usp=sharing

The data was analyzed using GraphPad Prism, the file can be found here:
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1QyyzIgeSy4G3wn5MtPFFinj_NHCQ6jSB/view?usp=sharing


Discussion


In Figures 1-4, it can be seen that the calculated cells/mL (already adjusted
for dilution ratio) increases to a maximum at 16x dilution and then plateaus.
If this were simply due to the fact that the macro cannot distinguish close or
overlapping cells at high cell concentrations, we would expect to see the
cells/mL count increase across all dilutions. Furthermore, we would expect not
to see this trend in the >30-day-old samples, as the cell concentrations were
very dilute. Neither of these phenomena were observed, so there must be
another explanation.

One possibility is that diluting the samples after staining also dilutes the
background due to free, unbound stain, without diluting the intracellular
stain, so that signal-to-noise ratio (contrast) is increased. Increased
contrast allows the FIJI-based image processing to correctly identify cells
with lower fluorescence that may be washed out by background. As the counts do
not continue to increase with further dilution beyond 32x, we can conclude
that the background is sufficiently reduced below the threshold of sensitivity
to enable identification of all fluorescent events in the micrographs. We can
proceed under the assumption that results obtained at the 16x dilution
represent the most accurate results for that particular staining method.

In figure 1, we can see that ALL methods underestimate the total number of
cells in freshly thawed suspension (though ReadyFlow + Propidium Iodide gives
the highest total count). This could be due to an excess of fluorescent
events, overwhelming the ability of the image processing to accurately count
all cells. However, the FIJI macros were developed to accurately count
approximately 1500 events per well in a 96 well plate, which is approximately
the number of events at the 16x and 32x dilutions. So, this is unlikely to be
the reason. Another possible explanation is that the fresh cells can
effectively prevent the stain from passing through their membranes, and/or the
cells can efficiently export the stain from the cytoplasm once it passes their
membranes. Either way, this was a consistent trend and is therefore important
to consider when using this method.

On the other hand, several methods (CMFDA + DAPI, Calcein AM + DAPI, ReadyFlow
+ Sytox Green) accurately reflected total cell counts by Trypan blue exclusion
in >30-day-old cell suspensions, as shown in Figure 2. This is very important
because at and beyond 30 days is when a successfully suspension-adapted cell
line will begin to grow rapidly, and being able to observe this total cell
count increase is essential to identifying the successful cell line.

DAPI-based dead stains tended to overestimate the dead cell count, as shown in
Figures 3 and 4. This is probably due to the fact that DAPI does permeate even
live cell membranes after enough time and/or at high concentrations. The
ReadyFlow-based methods also tended to overestimate the dead cell counts in
the freshly thawed cell suspension (Figure 3), possibly due to photo-
conversion of Hoechst to forms that fluoresce in the green and especially the
red channels (Jež et al. 2012, Piterburg  et al. 2012, Żurek-Biesiada et al.
2013, Karg and Golic, 2018). This is supported by the fact that accurate dead
cell counts for the freshly thawed cell suspension was obtained by the
combination of ReadyProbes (a much less fluorescent formulation of Hoechst)
with Sytox Green and Calcein AM with Propidium Iodide but NOT ReadyProbes with
Propidium Iodide. Red stains such as Propidium Iodide should therefore not be
used with Hoechst33342 stains.

Figure 1: Total (live + dead) cell count for all of the counting methods
tested on a freshly thawed cell suspension. Markers represent the mean of n=2,
error bars represent the range.  



Figure 2: Total (live + dead) cell counts for all of the counting methods
tested on a >30-day-old cell suspension. Markers represent the mean of n=2,
error bars represent the range.  



  

Figure 3: Dead cell counts for all of the counting methods tested on a freshly
thawed cell suspension. Markers represent the mean of n=2, error bars
represent the range.  



Figure 4: Dead cell counts for all of the counting methods tested on a
>30-day-old cell suspension. Markers represent the mean of n=2, error bars
represent the range.  



  

ReadyFlow (total cells)





Sytox Green (dead cells)

 Figure 5: Fluorescence micrographs of Hoechst ReadyFlow (top) + Sytox Green
(bottom), 16x dilution, freshly thawed suspension.

  


Limitations


Key limitations:

  1. Only one type of cell was tested (DOLLY12 fibroblasts), meaning that the results may not be confidently extrapolated to other cell types or species
  2. Only 2 replicates were completed for each condition; in the case where the range is large, the mean may be not be accurately indicated by these replicates, leading to potential false positives and/or negatives.
  3. Different concentrations of each stain were not tested, leading to potential false negatives
  4. The image acquisition (lamp intensity, gain, dynamic adjustment between panels in a stitched image) was not optimized, leading to potential false negatives
  5. Exposure time was set differently for each row (representing a specific combination of stains) and these settings were not recorded, leading to potential difficulty in replicating the method


Conclusions

  1. Hoechst 33342 ReadyFlow reagent should be used for total cell counting
  2. Sytox Green should be used with Hoechst 33342 ReadyFlow if a dead cell count is desired
  3. These stains are accurate for F_DOLLY12 cells >30 days in suspension
  4. These stains underestimate total cells and overestimate dead cells in freshly thawed F_DOLLY12 suspensions


Next steps

  1. Write lab book template for preparation and use of ReadyFlow with Sytox Green OR Propidium Iodide for live/dead staining of suspension cultures
  2. Continue to compare counts to Trypan Blue exclusion method and test incremental changes in the staining method to further improve the accuracy for freshly-thawed cell suspensions.
  3. Test the method on other cell types in other species against the Trypan Blue exclusion method.


References


Jež M, Bas T, Veber M, et al. The hazards of DAPI photoconversion: effects of
dye, mounting media and fixative, and how to minimize the problem. Histochem
Cell Biol. 2012;139:195-204\. doi: 10.1007/s00418-012-1039-8.

Piterburg M, Panet H, Weiss A. Photoconversion of DAPI following UV or violet
excitation can cause DAPI to fluoresce with blue or cyan excitation. Journal
of Microscopy. 2012;246:89-95\. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2818.2011.03591.x.

Żurek-Biesiada D, Kędracka-Krok S, Dobrucki JW. UV-activated conversion of
Hoechst 33258, DAPI, and Vybrant DyeCycle fluorescent dyes into blue-excited,
green-emitting protonated forms. Cytometry. 2013;83A:441-451\. doi:
10.1002/cyto.a.22260.

Karg TJ, Golic KG. Photoconversion of DAPI and Hoechst dyes to green and red-
emitting forms after exposure to UV excitation. Chromosoma.
2018;127(2):235-245. doi:10.1007/s00412-017-0654-5

  


