

https://docs.google.com/document/d/1u4n8t7oIsljUMtFY5irEyxl5rutwMuBr1gEitYKELU4/edit?usp=sharing

  

Meeting attendees from Vow: Ella Hodder,  Katie Bashant Day

Meeting attendees from DenovoMatrix: Dejan Husman (pronounce DeYan)
husman@denovomatrix.com

  

Denovomatrix are a regenerative therapy spinout company based in Dresden,
Germany, with a focus on using biomaterials to recreate the stem cell niche
for cell based therapies.

  

Denovo produce three main products:

  1. The screenMATRIX a 96-well plate for screening 96 coating compositions, including biological ligands, peptides and GAGs on cell adhesion, spreading and differentiation

  2. The myMATRIX chemically defined cell adhesion-promoting microenvironments offered pre-coated on various cultureware (flasks, plates etc) specially formulated for expansion of human mesenchymal stromal cells (hMSC) or induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSC), specifically in serum-free and xeno-free media.

  3. The beadMATRIX which provides coating compositions on various microcarrier options (degradable, edible etc).

  

For the purposes of this meeting we mostly discussed the application of the
screenMATRIX. However, it may be of benefit to investigate the beadMATRIX
route as well. Wherein, Dejan expressed good knowledge on the challenges with
microcarriers, in particular of Cytodex carriers. Dejan mentioned that harvest
from cytodex beads is especially challenging due to the charge interaction
binding of cells on these microcarriers, as opposed to functional attachment
via ligands. In which, trypsin is more suitable for cleaving functional bonds
than charge interactions, and therefore that cytodex carriers are typically
more difficult to harvest from. Dejan also mentioned that with their
microcarrier coatings they have received positive feedback on harvest
efficiencies, by using the functional based binding route.

  

The potential application of the screenMATRIX system for our purposes at Vow
was then discussed. In which we would test the screenMATRIC with our MuSCs
from different species in 2D culture using ACF media and assess for effects on
cell adhesion (initially) and differentiation. Once we are aware of the top
performing candidates we would then relay this to Denovomatrix and they would
send back plates containing various combinations of these factors, to see if
their combinatory effects would offer further improvement. Upon these findings
the next step would be to order these coatings in liquid formulation form, and
gain intel on their coating techniques for the coating of our scaffolds in-
house. Subsequently, we would test whether these factors have a similar
positive effect on cell adhesion and differentiation on our top performing
scaffolds in ACF.

  

Dejan will be sending an information sheet shortly, which will provide more
precise details on the screenMATRIX factor compositions. Some factors
mentioned included adhesion ligands, growth factors, peptide sequences (from
human) and signaling molecules. Specifically, 4x Glycosaminglycans (GAGs) (3x
GAGs being animal derived and 1x being non-animal derived), animal ECM
proteins including fibronectin, collagen, laminin etc as well as the non-
animal derived polysacchride dextran sulfate. It was shared that Denovomatrix
currently offer 24 different peptides, which they say are highly tunable for
different species, as they have a lot of inhouse expertise on peptide
synthesis.

  

Dejan discussed how Denovomatrix offers out licensing and technology transfer
for a licensing fee. This would be applicable in a scenario where we managed
to identify a specific coating composition which works well with our cells and
scaffolds and would start to require more coating than they can produce/offer.
However, Dejan said they do have a scalable production capacity and so in our
R&D phase it is likely that our needs would be met.

  

Another service that Denovomatrix provides is image analysis and data readout.
In this instance we would test screenMATRIX with our cells in 2D culture using
our ACF medias, and send the fixed and stained plates (parafilmed with sample
in PBS) back to Denovomatrix. Denovomatrix would then image these plates and
provide us with the analysis on the top performing wells/coatings. On this
note, we mentioned that we believe we have the capabilities for this type of
analysis in house. However, if we do decide that this could be a substantial
time saver on our end then we would be interested in hearing the quote for
this service.  
  
The meeting ended with the following actions:  
\- Dejan will share the screenMATRIX information sheet and quotes.

\- Ella (or Chris, or Katie) will respond to Dejan after relaying the
information received within Vow and deciding on whether we wish to proceed
with screenMATRIX, and if so which factors are of interest to us and how many
plates we would like to screen.

\- Ella and Katie will relay information on beadMATRIX provided to relevant
team members at Vow (i.e. Tom) in case they would be interested in a follow up
call with Dejan.

  

Questions (not shared in the meeting):

  

  * Is it worth the time dedication required to test out screenMATRIX? There would be a fairly long development phase before this gets to scaffolds.

  * Should this be a priority for us (based on recent issues with adhesion maintenance and differentiation on scaffolds I would lean towards a yes)

  * Would this fall under the DoE platform project primarily? Or is this of interest for other projects i.e. ACF media, cell expansion or co-culture? This would require multiple experiments and a significant time commitment from one project (late May likely through to late June or July)

  * What are we willing to pay for this service? Is this a collaboration we want to pursue?

  


