  
  
## Completed by: Bec Screnci




Cell loss has been observed in multiple experiments in the Gains and Heavy
Chains Project throughout Quarter 3 of 2021 (see summary of cells used within
each experiment and whether cell loss was observed).

See this google sheet looking into cell loss experienced in multiple cultures
throughout May - July (Quarter 2 2021). Additionally, this Notion document was
generated to compile possible reasons for cell loss in 1 place.

  

In summary; cell loss has been observed in both MuSC and fibroblast cultures,
in both serum-containing and serum-free Growth Media, as well as
Differentiation media (for MuSCs) at both proliferation and differentiation
stages of cell growth. These examples were also spread across multiple
incubators, with media being stored in different refrigerators, all at
different times.

  

Due to the inconsistencies and seemingly randomised cell loss with the above
investigations, this project in Q4 of 2021 will focus specifically on MuSCs in
the differentiation phase of myogenesis.

  

Upon review of older lab books, a similar cell loss was observed in BUFFY6 and
DOLLY12 cells in 96-well plate differentiation assay as per Failed Attempts
Report. In summary, cell loss was observed after 3-5 days of differentiation
across multiple plates. We then implemented a few cautionary fixes including:

\- Warming media for at least 20 mins before feeding

\- Aspirating media and replacing it immediately from each well to avoid wells
drying out

\- Aspirating/dispensing gently to avoid cells washing off due to force

\- Stopped using re-usable OT2 reservoirs for feeds and instead used sterile
containers to ensure there were not residual detergents affecting cell
viability

After employing all of these changes, cell loss was avoided. It is unclear
which factor was leading to cell loss before making the changes. By exposing
both DOLLY12 and C2C12 cells to harsh handling conditions (ie. forceful
pipetting, drying out of cells and cold media) and their interactions we aim
to address this uncertainty. The use of C2C12 cells will further guarantee our
results as they are more robust cells and if a particular condition causes
them to die it probably means it would cause any other cell to die. Day 7 will
be the final time point used in the experiment aimed at determining which of
these conditions has been contributing to cell loss for two main reasons; in
the first place, due to the fact that cell loss has been mainly observed after
3-5 days of differentiation, and in the second place, because we assume that
once cells reach day 8 of differentiation they are likely to survive.  

  

Another suspicion is that the working cell bank (WCB) cells that have been
used continuously for DOLLY12 experiments could potentially be at too late of
a passage, and be experiencing senescence which would result in a lack of
proliferation, differentiation capabilities and it could explain the cell
loss. For this reason, we will assess how cells from the master cell bank
(MCB) compare to the WCB cells in differentiation in both E6 and 2% HS over 10
days of differentiation to assess whether the cell survival of the MCB cells
is better than the WCB.

  


Aim


The aim of the "Cell Loss Investigation" project is to identify the causes of
cell loss and subsequently be able to replicate it in a controlled manner, and
avoid it in future experiments.


