

LINK TO SHORTCUT EPIC PAGES:  
Addy's Experiment  
Eva's Experiment  
Assessing different species in differentiation  
Determining whether cold media, the drying out of cells and/ore pipetting
force are causing cell death  
DOLLY12 MCB vs WCB  
  

LINK TO AIRTABLE ENTRY PAGE:  

Addy's Experiment  
Eva's Experiment  
Assessing different species in differentiation  
Determining whether cold media, the drying out of cells and/or pipetting force
are causing cell loss  
DOLLY12 MCB vs WCB

RELATED TO MILESTONE:  Key Results 2: Increase maturation markers by 10x
compared to non-stimulated control. (0.4 Milestone - achieve survival of a
primary cell line in differentiation for 14 days)

AIM/PURPOSE:  
To identify the potential sources of significant cell loss seen in many Q3
experiments using DOLLY12 cells.  
To experiment until we understand the contributing factors, and be able to
controllably replicate the cell loss.  
To rectify issues identified and achieve at least 10 days of differentiation,
demonstrating cell survival throughout.

HYPOTHESIS: That there is an interaction of cells, media and/or handling that
is contributing to the significant cell loss being observed, and that through
experimentation, we can identify those causes and rectify them to achieve cell
survival throughout differentiation.

RESULTS SUMMARY: "See Reports within EPIC".

CONCLUSIONS:

Addy/Eva's experiment: Despite not having reliable control conditions (due to
unexpected cell death in the Horse Serum controls), the results appear to
favour the hypothesis that a lower feeding volume and frequency may be more
beneficial for cell viability and maturity. More investigation will need to be
undertaken to come to a conclusive action.

Assessing different species in differentiation: When comparing DOLLY12, DAISY4
and BUFFY6 primary MuSCs with C2C12 (immortalised mouse myoblasts) in 10 days
of differentiation, DOLLY12 cells in E6 differentiation media suffer the
greatest cell loss compared to all other conditions.

Determining whether the handling of cells contributes to cell loss: The
results suggest that our primary cells are more robust than initially expected
and that operator handling (pipetting force), the temperature of the media and
whether wells are left to dry or not has not been the root cause of the cell
loss observed during Q3 and prior. In this experiment, all DOLLY12 cells
exposed to E6 differentiation media experienced significant cell loss,
indicating an interaction between the cells and the media that is unfavourable
to cell survival.

DOLLY12 MCB vs WCB: When comparing DOLLY12 MCB and WCB MuSCs over 10 days of
differentiation, DOLLY12 cells in E6 differentiation media suffer the greatest
cell loss regardless of their passage number. The extreme cell loss witnessed
appears to be a consequence of the relationship between DOLLY12 cells and E6
media, rather than cell senescence.

NEXT STEPS: Do not use DOLLY12 MuSCs for differentiation in E6 Differentiation
media. Instead, use BUFFY6 cells or another primary cell line that has been
proven to maintain cell attachment and survival throughout differentiation and
maturation.




Cell Death experiment tracker

#

Study summary

lead

Findings/Observations

2%HS survived?

E6 survived?  
  
1

Feeding Schedule (50 vs 100%, daily vs every second day)Addy, EvaDOLLY12 cells
in 2% HS died suddenly mid-way through differentiation. Likely an anomaly. N
(control died)Y (survived until Day 10 Diff)  
  
2

Cell line effect (Dolly vs C2C12 vs BUFFY vs DAISY)BecAll cells in E6 and 2%
HS survived 10 days of differentiation except for DOLLY12 cells in E6 which
experienced significant cell loss.YAll (Y) except DOLLY12 (N)  
  
3

Handling technique (temp of media, pipetting force and drying out of wells in
between feeds)EvaAll cells (C2C12 and DOLLY12) survived 7 days of
differentiation except for DOLLY12 cells in E6 which experienced significant
cell loss in all handling conditions, regardless of how gentle or harshly they
were handled.YAll (Y) except DOLLY12 (N)  
  
4

Senescence effect (MCB used as starting point)BecDOLLY12 cells (both MCB and
WCB) experienced significant cell loss in E6, but no cell loss in 2% HS
media.YN (both MCB and WCB)


