

Note: The TGFb used in this experiment was not reconstituted according to the
manufacturer's instructions which may have impacted results.

Important overarching finding:

Cells grown in ACF media formulations E89C, E810C, and E811B adhere to Cytodex
microcarriers

Discussion of Results:

Our aim in this experiment was to determine the baseline level of adhesion and
proliferation of cells grown in our top 3 ACF media formulations (E89C, E810C,
E811B) on Cytodex microcarriers. From our day 1 results, the adhesion of
DOLLY12 (Sheep cells) was comparable to serum for all 3 ACF formulations. We
had hypothesised that cells grown in ACF media may not adhere to to
microcarriers as well as cells grown in serum containing media. This is
because serum contains "proteins, growth factors, cytokines, cholesterol, free
fatty acids, and numerous other compounds that might influence cell
attachment". Therefore our results suggest that the combination of ingredients
in our ACF formulations does allow cell adhesion despite the absence of serum.
Furthermore, since formulations E810C and E811B were iterations of E89C (i.e.
they contain all the ingredients of E89C along with an additional ingredient),
these results suggest that ingredients in E89C alone are enough to allow our
cells to adhere and survive in suspension.

Interestingly, it appears that the learnings from optimising microcarrier
culture using serum-containing media were applicable for this initial test of
ACF microcarrier culture. This refers to factors such as intermitted shaking
and and an approximate seeding density (cells/microcarrier). However, it would
still be useful to optimise this further, for example, by testing lower
seeding densities for ACF media than what was used in this experiment. This
will ensure that cells are allowed to proliferate in suspension (rather than
planar culture) for as long as possible.

This was the first time ACF media was used for microcarrier culture at Vow.
The use of suspension culture rather than planar culture greatly increases the
surface area available for muscle stem cell to grow on, allowing large scale
expansion in bioreactors. We have previously performed experiments on
microcarriers using serum containing media. However, the use of FBS in media
not only poses ethical concerns that misalign with Vow's mission, it is also
expensive. Having a chemically defined ACF media will address these concerns
as well as provide a more reproducible process. Therefore, the continuation of
work on ACF media with microcarriers will be crucial for growing large number
of cells which can be then be seeded onto scaffolds for growing cultured meat.

  

  

Limitations

While cells were able to adhere to microcarriers in ACF media, neither our ACF
conditions nor our serum control was able to support proliferation. This could
be due to the length of time spent in culture, the use of 6 well plates rather
than 125mL flasks, or an issue with our MIA analysis calculations.  These
possible culprits will be further explored in followup experiments.

Concluding statement

Cells grown in ACF formulations E89C, E810C, and E811B can adhere to Cytodex
microcarriers for up to 4 days in suspension. Follow up experiments on long
term proliferation and harvesting of these cells should be performed in order
for us to progress towards the large-scale expansion of muscle stem cells in
ACF media for cultured meat.

Future directions

For this experiment, cells were grown in ACF media in planar culture for ~48
hours before being seeded onto microcarriers and they were only grown in
suspension for 4 days. Therefore, we don't have data on the proliferation of
cells in ACF media in suspension over a longer period of time.

We will also need to further investigate the reason for our lack of
proliferation.  Follow up experiments will include extending the cells' time
in culture to 7 days, culturing cells in 125mL shake flasks instead of 6wps,
and optimizing our MIA calculator for more accurate analysis.  

Along with this, we will need to test whether current harvesting methods will
work for cells  grown in ACF media. Additionally, if Vow implements ACF media
in the production process, it is likely that cells would need to go into ACF
media directly from a thawed WCB vial. Currently all of our WCB vials come
from cells that were grown in serum. Thawing these cells directly into ACF
media should therefore be tested in the future. Another area for further
research is the growth of cells from different species in various ACF
formulations as nutrient requirements will likely differ between species.

So far we have used biological aspects such as attachment and proliferation to
compare different formulations. However as we start understanding these, we
may focus our attention more on cost or effect on taste to make decisions
around which ACF media should be used for certain products.


