Introduction


Screening for media additives to add to our existing E6 formulation is key to
develop a media formulation that supports heightened maturation of our
myoblasts. Using the Definitive Screening Design (DSD) approach we are able to
screen both the individual and combination effects of various media
ingredients without having to perform (comparatively) large experiments.

Although our E6 differentiation media has proven to demonstrate a baseline
level of maturation, it remains to be optimized and improved upon. E6 consists
of 6 growth factors and small molecules, each of which have not been tested
thoroughly in combination with one another. The first aim of this experiment
is to optimise the current E6 formulation by understanding which of the
current factors of E6 prove to be most useful in differentiation and
maturation. The second aim of this experiment is to optimise our base E6
formulation by screening other media ingredients that have shown promise in
literature. For example, Das and co-workers have described two media
formulations capable of exhibiting long-term myotube growth and maintenance
[1].  Several ingredients included in the long-term maturation media described
by Das and co-workers are included in this experiment to formulate an
optimised differentiation/maturation media. These include:

  * B-27 supplement
  * Glutamax
  * G5 supplement
  * Acidic FGF

Moreover, several other ingredients from literature were included such as:

  * Caffeine [2] [3]
  * Forskolin

In total these factors (when combined with the ingredients in E6 formulation)
have been screened and assessed in a 12 factor DSD.


Summary of experiment


  * Two 96 well plates were seeded with BUFFY6 cells and grown to confluency.
  * The respective factors were thawed (if frozen) and reconstituted in the appropriate solvents and used to make working stocks.
  * Working stocks were mixed to create 26 DSD conditions on the OT2 via the "DSD media mixing protocol".
  * Cells were differentiated for 10 days with randomised DSD conditions with daily feeds performed on the OT2.
  * Both DSD plates were fixed and immunostained on the OT2


Results
  
  
Figure 1: Sorted parameter estimates from increasing to decreasing
significance.

Figure 2: Bar graph depicting the effects of all conditions and controls on
cell counts.

Figure 3: Actual by predicted plot of cell counts (Rsq = 0.76)


Discussion
  
  
Note: The results from this experiment were generated from DAPI cell count
data and not MyoG/MF20 expression data due to image capture/processing
limitations.

The JMP sorted parameter estimates (Figure 1) depict the significance of the
individual factor effects on cell counts. As seen from the Block[1] critical t
value in the figure, the significance of individual factor effects on cell
counts is outweighed by the effects of the Block. That is, that the plate-to-
plate effect is greater than the individual factor effects on cell counts
(with an exception of Factor X3). This could be due to any inconsistencies
between plates such as differences in plate handling, feeding technique, time
in incubator, time at RT etc. Given that both plates were fed and stained in
the same event on the Opentrons under the same conditions it is not
immediately obvious which of these reasons gave rise to this inconsistency.
However, during the feed, once fresh DSD media had been dispensed onto the
first plate, the protocol was paused and the first plate was returned to the
incubator. The protocol would then be resumed allowing the second plate to be
fed. The rationale behind this was to reduce the amount of time Plate 1 was
outside of the incubator, however this may have given rise to the
inconsistency between plates. Going forward, it will be ensured that both
plates in a DSD are exposed to identical conditions.

While the plate-to-plate variability compromises the individual factor
results, conclusions regarding individual factors can still be made however
they must be taken lightly and re-tested in a separate experiment.

From Figures 1 and 2, some notable factor and condition effects are seen:

  * Caffeine (Factor 3) produces a significant negative effect on cell counts.
  * B27 (Factor 1) and G5 (Factor 5) supplement provide a significant positive effect on cell counts.
  * Condition 24 shows promise especially when compared to the positive 2% horse serum media control (errors bars are overlapping however).

The high performance of B27 aligns with the findings of a previous DSD
experiment performed at Vow. Unsurprisingly, B27 contains several ingredients
found in our existing E6 formulation such as Insulin, Transferrin and Sodium
Selenium, however features a further range of other proteins, vitamins and
additives (see here). Similarly, G5 supplement contains the same ingredients
listed above in our E6 formulation. Hence, it's high performance is also
somewhat expected given the moderate success of our E6 media in
differentiating and maturing BUFFY6 myoblasts. While the ingredients featured
in these supplements are publicly listed, the individual concentrations are
confidential - making it somewhat difficult to replicate exactly in-house at
Vow. Future avenues may explore a large ingredient/concentration study to
determine optimal concentrations of each ingredient within this supplement or
rather pivot to the routine purchase and use of these commercially available
supplements.

Strangely, while these supplements (which contain E6 specific ingredients)
perform relatively well - the individual ingredients themselves do not produce
a significantly positive effect as evidenced in Figure 1. In fact, it is
highlighted in Figure 1 that Transferrin in particular depicts a negative
effect on cell counts. While this may suggest that Transferrin has a
inhibitory effect on myoblast differentiation, it's presence in G5 and B27
supplement as well as the large precedent in literature suggest that this
should not be the case. Repeated testing of these E6 ingredients may be
warranted to see if they produce a similar result, however given their widely
established success in media formulations published in literature it may be a
better approach to keep the ingredient and rather to perform a concentration
optimisation study instead to fine-tune our existing formulation.

Moreover, while there has been literature precedent for the use of caffeine
for myoblast differentiation [2] [3], this was not evident in this study.
Furthermore, the reported concentration used by Yokokawa and co-workers was
not able to be re-constituted and the maximum concentration that was possible
was used in this study (see re-constitution details). It is possible that the
concentration reported by the team may not be correct (which may be likely as
it exceeded the reported maximum solubility of caffeine). To investigate
caffeine as a maturation promoting ingredient, a concentration gradient of
caffeine should be assessed in an isolated study as it is suspected the
concentration used in this study may be too high for cell culture.

Overall, while the validity of these results may be masked by high plate-to-
plate variability, this study points to several promising ingredients for
which re-testing in an isolated experiment is warranted.


Limitations


  * Inconsistency between plates with regards to time at RT during feeding process potentially generated the significance observed in Figure 1 with Block [1]. Hence, the validity of results is compromised.
  * MyoG and MF20 data displayed a large amount of variability due to imaging conditions being incompatible with macro analysis and hence could not be used confidently in JMP analysis.
  * The negative effects of caffeine may have skewed/masked the effects of the remaining factors by creating unfavourable conditions for cell survival and differentiation.


Conclusion


A 12-factor DSD experiment was performed in order to optimize and improve on
our existing E6 formulation. While the validity of the results is somewhat
compromised by plate-to-plate variability, the study has shown promise in the
B27 and G5 supplements on potentially improving maturation in our BUFFY6
myoblasts. Furthermore, caffeine has shown a significant negative effect on
differentiation in the concentration recommended by Yokokawa and co-workers.


Future directions


  * Perform an isolated myoblast differentiation experiment with B27 and G5 supplement to validate the preliminary results of this study.
  * Replicate the Condition 24 formulation (while removing factors that produce a negative effect as per Figure 1) and assess it's performance on differentiation with respect to controls.
  * Implement more stringent treatment of both blocks in future DSD experiments to mitigate plate-to-plate effects and variability.
  * Perform DSD experiments on the individual ingredients that make up supplements such as B27 and G5.

  


References


[1] Das, M., Rumsey, J., Bhargava, N., Stancescu, M. and Hickman, J., 2009.
Skeletal muscle tissue engineering: A maturation model promoting long-term
survival of myotubes, structural development of the excitation-contraction
coupling apparatus and neonatal myosin heavy chain expression. Biomaterials,
30(29), pp.5392-5402.

[2] Yokokawa, T., Hashimoto, T. and Iwanaka, N., 2021. Caffeine increases
myoglobin expression via the cyclic AMP pathway in L6 myotubes. Physiological
Reports, 9(9).

[3] Ojuka, E., Jones, T., Han, D., Chen, M. and Holloszy, J., 2003. Raising
Ca2+in L6 myotubes mimics effects of exercise on mitochondrial biogenesis in
muscle. The FASEB Journal, 17(6), pp.675-681.


