

All images can be viewed here: https://mia-
capture.vow.tools/#/session/recKmwnz89tqy25Ye/images




Dapi and Hoechst staining of EPL coated and DOLLY12 seeded zein scaffolds.

The scaffold arm of this experiment had to be aborted due to a lack of cell
attachment at day 1. Low cell attachment is believed to have occurred due to
an adverse affect of an altered EPL coating procedure. Due to time restraints,
coating of scaffolds was performed overnight, as opposed to our standard
coating time of just 1-2 hours.  See lab book entry here: https://au-
mynotebook.labarchives.com/share/Vow%2520-%2520Team%2520Science/MjY2LjV8MTA2MzE3LzIwNS01NzYvVHJlZU5vZGUvMzQ4OTA3NzMwMHw2NzYuNQ==




Comparing cell survival of Hoechst/Dapi stained  DOLLY12 cells to unstained
DOLLY12 cells , after 7 days in culture.

After 7 days of culture, cells that had been stained with Hoechst or Dapi on
day 1, did not have a visibly different morphology or confluence compared to
that of unstained cells when viewed by phase microscopy (n=4). This indicates
that there was no variation in cell viability between groups. It was not
possible to estimate cell viability using dapi staining as planned, due to the
difficulties outlined here in the next section.

Image: DOLLY12 cells after 7 days of culture. On day 1, cells were unstained
(A), stained with Hoechst (B) or stained with Dapi (C).

  




Assessing the feasibility of using Dapi staining on unfixed DOLLY12 cells to
estimate cell viability.

Dapi staining of unfixed cells at concentration's of both 10ug/ml and 5ug/ml
resulted in all nuclei being stained, rather than just dead cell nuclei. Some
cells stained much more brightly than others (n=4). It is probable that the
more brightly stained cells were dead, while the more faintly stained cells
were alive however this is unclear. Day 7 Dapi staining at 5ug/ml, also
appeared brighter than D1 staining at 10ug/ml which was unexpected (N=4).

Due to universal cell staining, our protocol, which used unfixed cell staining
with dapi at concentrations of 5ug/ml or 10ug/ml (to obtain dead cell
estimates), followed by fixed cell dapi staining (to obtain total cell
estimates), was not effective in clearly differentiating live from dead cells
and was therefore not useful in estimating cell viability. Re-staining cells
with dapi after fixation also resulted in the majority of cells being washed
away from the plate. Due to this cell loss, it was difficult to make
comparisons between dapi staining patterns before and after fixation.

Image: Unfixed 10ug/ml dapi stained DOLLY12 Cells at D1 (A), unfixed 5ug/ml
dapi stained DOLLY12 Cells at D7 . Images taken at 5x magnification.

Image: Unfixed 5ug/ml dapi stained DOLLY12 Cells at D7 (A), Fixed 1ug/ml dapi
stained DOLLY12 Cells at D7 (A).  Images taken at 5x magnification.

  

  




Assessing persistence of Hoechst/dapi staining in DOLLY12 cells over a 7 day
culture period.

Hoechst staining of the DOLLY12 cells in planar culture was brightest at D1,
becoming less intense over time. After 7 days in culture, very little stain
was visible in the cells. Cells are still present however, as demonstrated by
that phase contrast imaging shown in the section above.  

Image: Hoechst stained DOLLY12 Cells at D1 (A), D3 (B), D5 (C) and D7 (D).
Images taken at 5x magnification.  

Dapi staining of the DOLLY12 cells in planar culture was brightest at D1,
becoming less intense over time. After 7 days in culture, very little stain
was visible in the cells. Cells are still present however, as demonstrated by
that phase contrast imaging shown in the section above.  

Image: Hoechst stained DOLLY12 Cells at D1 (A), D3 (B), D5 (C) and D7 (D).
Images taken at 5x magnification.  

  


