

Discussion

Fix and Dapi staining is currently the most commonly used method assessing
cell attachment to scaffolds at Vow. Due to the fixation step, this method
involves removing samples from continued culture at the time of staining.
Hoechst 3342 and Dapi staining can also be used to stain unfixed cells,
allowing cells to continue in culture after staining. Consequently, live
Hoechst and Dapi staining may provide an alternative method for assessing cell
attachment and viability, without the need to terminate stained samples. Thus,
the use of Hoechst or DAPI would allow for the repeat use of samples and
subsequently facilitate the assessment of cell viability across multiple time
points, reducing replicate requirements. This will be of particular benefit
when moving into high-throughput design of experiment (DoE) based experiments
where we will have high sample demands (and as a result high cell demands).
Before transitioning towards unfixed staining, we wanted to assess the affects
of these live cell staining protocols on DOLLY12 cell viability in continued
culture, to identify any possible cytotoxic effects on cells. Wherein, it has
been revealed that in some instances, Hoechst staining has been detrimental to
cell survival [1].  In the work by Schendzzielorz et al., for example, it was
seen that after Hoechst 3342 staining, adipose derived stem cells developed
DNA damage and a loss of viability in continued culture [1]. Toxicity of both
Dapi and Hoechst 3342 has also been demonstrated in the continued culture of
human leukemic cells [2].

Our study only looked at cells in planar culture, as our cells were not
successfully seeded to our zein scaffolds at the beginning of the experiment.
We saw that after 7 days of culture, cells that had been stained with Hoechst
or Dapi on day 1, did not have a visibly different morphology or confluence
compared to that of unstained cells when viewed by phase microscopy. This
indicates that there was little or no variation in cell viability between
groups, suggesting that there is no strong negative impact of dapi or Hoechst
staining on cell survival. Due to shortcomings in our dapi staining protocol
however, we were unable to make a quantitative assessments of cell survival.

Dapi staining of unfixed cells at concentrations of both 10ug/ml and 5ug/ml
resulted in all nuclei being stained, rather than just dead cell nuclei. When
staining at day 1 with 10ug/ml, some cells stained much more brightly than
others and it is probable that the more brightly stained cells were dead,
while the more faintly stained cells were alive. Strangely, when staining at
5ug/ml at day 7 however, all nuclei appeared brightly stained, making it
impossible to differentiated between live and dead cells. Because of this, our
protocol, which used unfixed cell staining (to obtain dead cell estimates),
followed by fixed cell dapi staining (to obtain total cell estimates), was not
effective in clearly differentiating live from dead cells and was therefore
not useful in estimating cell viability. Re-staining cells with dapi after
fixation also resulted in most cells being washed away from the plate.
Universal nuclei staining, coupled with cell loss made it difficult to make
comparisons between Dapi staining patterns before and after fixation.

References

1\.            Schendzielorz, P., et al., Labeling Adipose-Derived Stem Cells
with Hoechst 33342: Usability and Effects on Differentiation Potential and DNA
Damage. Stem cells international, 2016. 2016: p. 6549347-6549347.

2\.            Park, C.H., B.F. Kimler, and T.K. Smith, Comparison of the
supravital DNA dyes Hoechst 33342 and DAPI for flow cytometry and
clonogenicity studies of human leukemic marrow cells. Exp Hematol, 1985.
13(10): p. 1039-43.

  




Future directions

The results of our study did not indicate cytotoxic effects of Dapi or Hoechst
staining in DOLLY12 cells over a 7 day culture period however this conclusion
is based solely on subjective comparisons of stained and unstained cells under
phase microscopy. In order to produce quantifiable cell viability data, future
studies should aim to optimise Dapi staining protocols to ensure visible
differentiation between live and dead cells. Alternative viability stains such
as calcein/propidium iodine could also be investigated as these stains are
able to differentially stain either live or dead cells only.

To reduce possible cytotoxic effects, both Dapi and Hoechst staining protocols
should also be optimised with a view to minimising staining concentrations and
staining incubation times as cytotoxicity is likely to be dose dependant.
Schendzzielorz, P., et al., have shown that using lower Hoechst 3342 staining
concentrations of 0.5ug/ml compared to 5ug/ml reduced cell death in adipose
derived mesenchymal stem cells [1]. Given that we obtained bright, sustained
staining of DOLLY12 cells with both Dapi and Hoechst, sufficient staining may
still be achieved using lower staining concentrations and/or incubation times.

The scaffold arm of the project was aborted early in the experiment due to a
lack of cell attachment to scaffolds at day 1. This lack of attachment is
believed to have occurred due to an adverse effect of EPL coating of scaffolds
overnight, as opposed to our standard coating time of 1-2 hours. Cells stained
with Dapi or Hoechst in 3D culture may also behave differently to those in 2D
culture systems.  In future, it would be useful to replicate and optimise this
experiment using cell seeded scaffolds such as zein, as scaffold are likely to
be used throughout our DOEs.

  

1\.            Schendzielorz, P., et al., Labeling Adipose-Derived Stem Cells
with Hoechst 33342: Usability and Effects on Differentiation Potential and DNA
Damage. Stem cells international, 2016. 2016: p. 6549347-6549347.

  




Conclusion

Staining of unfixed DOLLY12 with dapi or Hoechst did not appear to adversely
affect cell survival after 7 days in planar culture. Future studies should aim
to accurately quantify cell viability after staining, to optimise staining
conditions and to investigate Hoechst and Dapi staining using unfixed DOLLY12
seeded scaffolds.

  


