Key findings:


  * 550 million CHO-S cells were frozen down in liquid nitrogen as an MCB cryo-bank for science R&D purposes, after 7 days in culture and a 10 million initial thaw
  * Cells exhibited long doublings time in the 1-4 day time period following the thaw. However viability remained high (>90%)
  * By day 7 in culture the CHO-S demonstrated doubling times (~19 hrs) comparable those highlighted in the manufactures user guide (16-22 hrs)
  * Addition of pen-strep after thawing did not impact cell growth despite manufactures recommendation on excluding it during the first few passages (2-3)


Results/Discussion:


The purpose of this experiment was to generate an MCB cryobank of suspension
adapted CHO-S epithelial cells for science R&D purpose. Similar to adherent
expansion, the procedure by which this MCB was generated involved thawing
CHO-S cells into E125 flasks and progressively passaging them into larger
vessels until a desired concentration was achieved. In total ~550 million
CHO-S were frozen in liquid nitrogen after approximately 7 days in culture and
an initial thaw of 10 million cells.

  

Figure 1 demonstrates the amount of doublings of CHO-S after 4 and 7 days in
culture. Initially, after 4 days in culture the CHO-S cells exhibited a
relatively small number of doublings given that they are expected to double
roughly once every day. Fortunately, manufacturers instructions indicated that
the cells would initially be slow to double in the 3-5 day time period
following a thaw [1]. However during this same period viability of the cells
remained high (data not shown). As expected, after 7 days in culture the CHO-S
underwent an almost two-fold increase in doublings, in line with the
manufactures guidelines (Figure 1). In addition, the manufactures recommended
not including pen-strep, as it could potentially inhibit cellular growth.
Therefore, the 10 million cell vial was split into two cultures; one
supplemented with pen-strep and the other without. Results indicated that
there was no significant difference between the 2 cultures. In fact the pen-
strep supplemented flask demonstrated higher doublings, however this was a
replicate of n=1 and not statistically significant. However, these results
indicate that pen-strep can be included to maintain sterility requirements
whilst not impacting cell growth. Simultaneously, the doubling time of the
CHO-S cells were evaluated. As expected, and in line with the doublings, the
CHO-S cells exhibited relatively long doublings times given that they are
expected to double every 16-22 hours [1]. However, as indicated previously, it
is explicit in the user guide that doubling time can exceed 22 hours during
the first few passages after the cells have been thawed [1]. As expected the
doubling time by day 7 was ~19 hours, a drastic reduction from day 4, which
was irrespective of the culturing condition (i.e. with or without pen-strep).

  

  

  

Figure 1: Total doublings of CHO-S epithelial cells in suspension culture.
Each data point represents a timestamp at which the cells were passaged. Given
that the addition of Pen-Strep did not have a significant impact on cell
growth the cells from both culture flasks were combined on day 7. n=1 for each
condition.

  

Figure 2: Doubling times of CHO-S epithelial cells in suspension culture. Each
data point represents a timestamp at which the cells were passaged. Given that
the addition of Pen-Strep did not have a significant impact on cell growth the
cells from both culture flasks were combined on day 7. n=1 for each condition.

  

  

References:

[1] https://au-
mynotebook.labarchives.com/doc/view/NTg1NDkuNHwxMDYzMTcvNDUwMzgvRW50cnlQYXJ0Lzk2OTUzMTM3M3wxNDg2MjUuNA==?nb_id=MTM4MjEyLjF8MTA2MzE3LzEwNjMxNy9Ob3RlYm9vay8xOTE5Nzg2MDB8MzUwODQ2LjE%3D


Limitations:


There were no limitations concerned with this experiment.


Conclusion:


An MCB of CHO-S (~550 million) was successfully generated after 1 week in
suspension culture for science R&D experiments, in particular serving as a
positive control for suspension experiments.


Future Directions:


  * Evaluate if CHO-S cells can survive in different basal mediums. FreeStyle CHO is an expensive chemically defined media and not feasible for the large scale expansion or continual culturing of CHO-S cells due to its procurement cost. Therefore if may be beneficial to evaluate cheaper alternatives (i.e. CD-CHO, RPMI or DMEM/F12)
  * Generate a WCB of CHO-S cells, only if required 


