

Hoechst live cell staining of both Suspension Seeding and Flip Seeding zein
scaffolds showed even coverage of cells for both conditions at Day 1 and Day
7. Dry seeded samples showed more noticeable topographical surface structures,
such as cracks and holes, than wet samples. Hoechst stained cells were found
to collect within the cracks and holes of dry seeded samples, with more
scattered cell coverage seen on the wet seeded samples. Wet seeded samples had
noticeably more free cells in the well after transferring the sample to a
fresh well, than the dry seeded samples. However, dry seeded samples did not
appear to have noticeably more cell coverage than wet seeded samples after
sample well transfer.

  

Figure 1: Day 1 images of Hoechst stained zein scaffolds seeded with muscle
precursor cells using varying methods. A) Wet suspension seeded. B) Dry
suspension seeded. C) Wet flip seeded. D) Dry flip seeded. For more sample
images see labarchives entry 16/04/21 Day 1 Imaging of Scaffolds.

  

Figure 2: Day 7 images of Hoechst stained zein scaffolds seeded with muscle
precursor cells using varying methods. A) Wet suspension seeded. B) Dry
suspension seeded. C) Wet direct seeded both sides. D) Dry direct seeded both
sides. 1) Zein scaffold side 1. 2) Zein scaffold side 2. For clearer
individual sample images, see labarchives entry 22/04/21 Day 7 Imaging of
Scaffolds.

  

  




Analysis

To determine the effect of the different seeding methods on cell coverage (%)
on the scaffolds, four participants reviewed selected fluorescence images of
the Hoechst stained scaffolds. Participants were blinded to the seeding
method. Three day 1 images per seeding condition were selected to provide
three different views of each scaffold seeding condition. All day 7 images
were used, providing one image of each side of the scaffold per condition. A
cell-free control condition was analysed at day 7 of cell culture but not day
1. All selected scaffold images were scored by the four participants for
percentage (%) of cell coverage.

Wet Flipped Scaffold seeding was scored with a higher cell scaffold coverage
at day 1 and day 7, compared to the other seeding methods. Dry Flipped
Scaffold seeding was found to have the next highest cell scaffold coverage at
day 1 but the lowest cell coverage at day 7, compared to the other seeding
methods. Wet Flipped Scaffold seeding also demonstrated similar cell coverage
on each side of the scaffold at day 7, whereas Wet Suspension, Dry Suspension
and Dry Flipped Scaffold seeding showed more coverage on one side of the
scaffold than the opposite side.

  

Figure 3: Cell coverage (%) on zein scaffolds viewed by fluorescence
microscopy with Hoechst stain at Day 1 and Day 7 of muscle precursor cell
culture. Error bars indicate the average standard deviation between the cell
coverage scorers. A cell-free control condition was analysed at day 7 of cell
culture but not day 1, with all scorers recording 0% cell coverage observed on
day 7.

Figure 4: Cell coverage (%) on zein scaffolds viewed by fluorescence
microscopy with Hoechst stain at Day 7 of muscle precursor cell culture. Error
bars indicate the average standard deviation between the cell coverage
scorers.


