

Current methods for seeding of scaffolds at Vow involves our in-house zein
scaffolds being left to dry for 1-2 hours prior to cell seeding. A method
which is suspected to improve cell seeding. The present seeding technique for
scaffolds involves pipetting of a 50ul volume of cell suspension on top of our
96-well sized scaffold pieces. Wherein, the small cell suspension volume
(relative to scaffold surface area) is used to prevent sample/liquid run off
and thus non-specific cell binding to the tissue culture plastic surrounding
the sample. Despite seeing repeatedly good seeding efficiency with this
current technique (ref to previous study here), it has also been shown this
seeding technique results in cells being preferentially seeded on one side of
the scaffolds, with imaging results consistently showing much higher cell
confluence on one side of the scaffold than the other.

  
... thus the intention of this study was to...  
  
The outcome of this experiment demonstrated that the Wet Flipped Scaffold
seeding method scored a higher cell scaffold coverage on both day 1 and day 7
when compared to the other seeding methods. Subsequently, these results do not
support the hypothesis that dried scaffolds will result in higher cell
confluence upon seeding than wet scaffolds. However, the hypothesis that both
cell suspension* and flipped scaffold** seeding will result in cell coverage
on both sides of the scaffolds was supported by this experiment. Furthermore,
a more even cell coverage was seen on each side of the Wet Flipped Scaffolds
at day 7, when compared to the other seeding methods, which showed more
coverage on one side of the scaffold than the opposite side. Thus, this
experiment indicates the best method of seeding cells onto our in-house zein
scaffolds is to use wet scaffold for seeding and deposit half the desired
amount of cells on each side of the scaffold. This information will be
important for all following experiments and operations when using in-house
zein scaffolds. Wherein, ensuring good cell adhesion and coverage on both
sides of the zein scaffolds will reduce the need for manual handling of the
samples during imaging, which will be particularly important for automating
our imaging processes. In addition, attaining optimal cell coverage and
seeding across the scaffold will be important for achieving homogenous food
products. In which, an even cell coverage across the scaffolds will most
likely result in a more evenly distributed presence of mature muscle across
the samples (following maturation and differentiation), thus resulting in a
more consistent mouth feel/bite.  

  

It should be noted that there were some major limitations within this
experiment which should be considered when interpreting the findings of this
study. Examples of these limitations include the small sample size employed as
well as the qualitative interpretation of the scaffold cell coverage (%) by a
small number of participants. For each condition in this experiment a
replicate number of N = 1 or N = 2 was employed for staining and imaging on
day 1 and day 7 of cell culture respectively. For this reason the
interpretation of the data in this experiment cannot be considered as
reliable, with the low replicate numbers preventing a thorough comparison
across conditions. Furthermore, imaging of the Hoechst stained scaffolds on
day 1 of culture was conducted manually by an operator, with close-up images
taken of areas with noticeable cell coverage. Thus these images may be prone
to bias and cannot be considered representative of the whole scaffold piece.
Due to progress in our imaging automating, the imaging of the Hoechst stained
scaffolds on day 7 was instead conducted by the Zabre microscope, with an
automated image stitching process which combined many images to make one image
of one whole side of the zein scaffold. However, this process is still new to
Vow, and so it is unknown how accurate the automated images are for cell
scaffold coverage (%). For the results of this experiment to be more robust
and reliable, a larger sample size per condition will be required and
consistent imaging techniques used between imaging scaffolds at day 1 and day
7 of cell culture. In addition to this, a validated, automated cell counting
process should also be used to determine cell coverage (%), in addition to the
automated imaging process, or an increased number of cell coverage estimating
participants should be used if the analysis is to be continued manually.
Future experiments should consider repeating the experiment with improved
experimental design and execution, addressing the limitations of this
experiment. Lastly, if future work is to rely on a manual interpretation of
the scaffold coverage an investigation on whether participants score in a
predictable manner should be conducted using standardised cell coverage
examples. In addition it should be determined whether 'reference' cell
coverage images are required to calibrate different scorers.

In summation, the results of this experiment indicate that Wet Flipped
Scaffold seeding results in a higher cell coverage and a more even cell
coverage on each side of the scaffold, compared to the other seeding methods.
These results indicate that pre-drying the zein scaffolds is an unnecessary
step in cell seeding and that flipping the scaffold provides more even cell
coverage on each side of the scaffold when seeding a wet scaffold.  

  


