Introduction


Alginate for cell encapsulation and muscle tissue engineering

The naturally occurring polysaccharide alginate has been widely used in
biomedical applications because of its non-antigenicity, good
biocompatibility, and reasonable biodegradability. An additional attribute of
alginate, is that in the presence of divalent cations (Ca2+), it can be
ionically crosslinked in a manner which is mild, cell compatible, easy to
apply and cost-effect. As a result alginate has been popularly employed as a
drug-delivery system, a cell carrier, and a cell-laden bioink in a 3D
bioprinting (Ahn, Lee, Bonassar, & Kim, 2012).

Ansari et al. demonstrated that an RGD coupled alginate hydrogel encapsulation
system supported the viability of gingival mesenchymal stem cells (GMSCs) and
their myogenic differentiation capacity. In terms of differentiation, it was
found that alginate hydrogels with an elasticity between 10 and 16 kPa, in
comparison to softer (<5kPa) or stiffer (>20kPa) hydrogels, demonstrated the
highest capacity for myogenic differentiation as evidenced by an upregulation
of myogenic genes, including myogenin, MyoD, and Myf5 GMSCs. With a higher
expression than that of encapsulated human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
(hBMMSCs), which were stated as the gold standard of MSC therapy.

In a previous study in house, we did not observe cell adhesion or
differentiation inside alginate, despite much higher cell seeding density. In
this study and before moving to RGD peptide inclusion as outlined above, we
are assessing the addition of ECM proteins coupled with high cell seeding
density to allow for adhesion and subsequent differentiation.


Summary


## Study setup:

  1. Cell expansion of C2C12s
  2. Day 0: Cell harvest and seeding into gel matrices with various ECM proteins (see platemap below)
  3. Day 1: 100% switch media to E6 and start differentiation
  4. Day 2: 100% feed, CMFDA viability stain
  5. Day 3: 100% feed, MTT viability assay
  6. Day 4: 100% feed
  7. Day 5: 100% feed
  8. Day 6: 100% feed
  9. Day 7: assess maturity of muscle using immunostaining or total protein quant.

  


Key Findings


  1. Alginate gels at 1 and 2% alginate content were successfully seeded at high cell density with the inclusion of 3 different ECM proteins. A non-ECM control was not included because in previous studies it did not result in cell adhesion.
  2. Cell viability was maintained inside Alginate gels, but no adhesion and consequently, no differentiation was observed.
  3. no gel contraction was observed due to cells not adhering to the hydrogel matrix
  4. Bradford results were reflective of presence of cells vs non-cell laden controls, but due to lack of cell adhesion no maturation-related protein increases could be observed


Discussion and Limitations


Discussion:

The preparation of cell-laden alginate spheres was surprisingly
straightforward and is a promising step towards scaling the maturation process
(scaffolding). However, using ECM-Alginate matrices, again no cell adhesion or
contraction was observed. Unsuitable matrix stiffness is still a possible
reason for the observed lack of adhesion. We did not test the actual stiffness
of the gels generated due to lack of testing infrastructure (rheometer).

Again, imaging of these gels still proved challenging due to high cell
densities and background fluorescence from other focal planes. MTT results
showed good cell survival in all samples based on the appearance of blue
stained cells.

The Bradford results collected from this study were reflective of the cell
content for each sample set, the encapsulated ECM proteins did not contribute
to background levels protein measured. As shown below, each cell-laden sample
is at a similar total protein level whereas all cell-free (but ECM-containing)
controls disappear into the baseline. This demonstrates, that the alginate
sphere format is a suitable format to compare total protein expression between
mature and control conditions once adhesion is achieved. There was no
conclusive trend or difference between 2% and 1% gels.

  

Limitations:

  1. The preparation of alginate gels took quite long, and cells were exposed to non-ideal conditions (high calcium, room temp, no media) for extended periods of time. This could have affected experiment outcomes.
  2. Imaging of the gels is tricky, making it hard to conclude if cells are adhering or not


Conclusion


We found that high density encapsulation even in comibination with the
inclusionof ECM proteins does not enable cells to adhere and differentiate in
alginate gels. Although cells survived inside alginate-ECM hybrids, they were
not able contract the gel matrix regardless of gel stiffness (1% vs 2%).
Despite the alginate matrix being optically clearer compared to previously
studied gels (collagen and fibrin), IF staining and imaging were not
significantly easier and alternative methods of maturation analysis need to be
assessed.

The Alginate sphere format allowed for direct comparison for protein values of
different conditions due to the reproducible size of the samples. The included
ECM did not majorly contribute to background total protein absorbance in a
Bradford assay, however due to the cells not maturing no significant increase
in total protein was achieved and we probably just measured a myoblast
baseline.


Future Directions


  * include as an additional component to the alginate matrix: 
    * RGD peptides 
    * growth factors 
    * fibroblasts 
  * now that the the meatball format allows for direct comparison, encapsulate cells at various seeding densities to assess total protein response


