

## Completed by: Shaleen Sharma  


Aim/Purpose


To build upon the framework in the first iteration of automated media changes,
and determine the optimal volume for daily media changes on the OT2 in primary
cells.


Hypothesis


It is hypothesised that at lower working volumes the maturity discrepancy
between the automated and manual cultures will be high (almost a negative
control). On the other hand, it is expected that at the highest working volume
(200uL) the requirement of fresh media to the primary cells will be met and
hence incomplete aspiration will not be a determining factor in the maturity
of the cultures.


Background/Technical Gap


By introducing liquid handling automation, we can free up the bandwidth of our
scientists to research and develop alternative strategies to increase the
maturation of our muscle. Furthermore, by mitigating the element of manual
pipetting we can withstand an increase in experiments as the feeding schedules
of these would be automated.

Prior to the first iteration of this experiment, the key technical gap was
whether a clear benefit in terms of efficiency, reliability and accuracy is
seen from automating feeds. Moreover, it was unclear whether the manual
workflow can be successfully translated to the automated platform without
affecting the viability and maturation of our muscle cells. The first
iteration depicted slower differentiation/maturation of C2C12 cells when fed
on the OT2, however this likely is due to the cells not receiving adequate
fresh media. This problem is likely not evident with primary cells due to
their reduced media expenditure - however this remains to be tested.

This experiment will determine the (estimated) optimal working volume for
primary cells fed on the OT2. The following volume ranges will be assessed:

  * 200uL
  * 150uL
  * 120uL
  * 100uL


Method/Procedure
  
  
Figure 1: Overview of EPIC


  
  
Figure 2: Plate map for BUFFY6 cultures. Volume amounts (uL) refer to daily
media change volumes.  
  
  




Experimental protocol for feed automation:

  * Seed two 96 well plates with BUFFY6 myoblasts.
  * Differentiate each plate for several days, with one set being feed manually and the other using the OT2.
  * Each feed features media changes with varying volumes (200uL, 150uL, 120uL, 100uL) on both the OT2 and cultures fed manually.
  * Compare cell viability and MyoG/MF20 signal between the two conditions (automated feeds vs. manual) using automated immunostaining protocols*


  
  
Figure 3: OT2 deck layout for cell run


  
  
Experimental details

  

96 well plate  
  
Cell type

BUFFY6  
  
Number of plates

2  
  
Working volume for each well

200/150/120/100 uL  
  
Expected seed date

26/11/21  
  
Number of wells seeded

96 (all)  
  
Proliferation period

2 days (over weekend)  
  
Proliferation media required

15mL (both plates)  
  
Seeding density (cells/well)

5000  
  
Total cells required

480,000 cells  
  
Maturation period

10 days  
  
Differentiation start date

29/11/21  
  
E6 media requirements (daily)

15mL each plate  
  
Total E6 requirements

150mL  
  
Markers of success

  * DAPI count comparison
  * MyoG/MF20 signal between conditions
  * Variability within conditions


