Aim


To investigate the effect of different feeding frequencies and volumes on the
survival, differentiation and maturation of DOLLY12 WCB muscle stem cells
(MuSCs), using E6 and 2% HS.


Hypothesis


Cell survival and maturity will be unaffected by changes in feeding volume and
frequency when compared to the controls over a 10-day differentiation period.


Background


Over Q3 2021, cell loss during the differentiation phase was observed in many
of our experiments. It is imperative that the cause of this issue is
identified so that future efforts directed towards improving the maturation
process of muscle stem cells is not impeded.

At present, proliferation of DOLLY12 WCB MuSCs occurs in growth media for 3-4
days until the wells are 95-100% confluent, at which point they are switched
into E6 differentiation media. From then on, 100% of the media is replaced
every day for 10-14 days, after which the wells are fixed, stained and
analysed to determine maturation.

It is known that during the differentiation process, cells secrete factors
that support growth and maturation, but also produce waste products that may
cause counterproductive effects (i.e. cell death). Hence, the frequency and
volume of media that cells are fed may be an important factor affecting cell
survival and maturation.

As such, the current experiment was designed to test 5 different feeding
schedules:

  1. 100% media change, daily (D)
  2. 100% media change, every second day (ESD)
  3. 50% media change, D
  4. 50% media change, ESD
  5. 0% media change (negative control)

All of these conditions were tested using two separate differentiation media
(resulting in a total of 10 different feeding conditions):

  * E6 (animal component-free media consisting of a basal medium with equal parts DMEM and F12, along with LAA2P, transferrin, insulin, sodium selenium and sodium bicarbonate)
  * Basal media (DMEM + F12) with 2% HS (which acted as the control)

Maturation was quantified using two key metrics:

  * The proportion of viable cells expressing myogenin, an early stage marker of differentiation (MyoG : DAPI)
  * Normalised MF20 area, which represented the total well area occupied by myotubes divided by the total number of viable cells


Summary of Events


Proliferation Phase

  * D-7: Thaw DOLLY12 WCB cells and seed into 3 x T175 
  * D-6: 50% feed DOLLY12 WCB cells with growth media
  * D-4: Passage DOLLY12 WCB cells into 4 x 96wp
  * D-2: 50% feed DOLLY12 WCB cells with growth media

Differentiation Phase

  * D0D: Change to E6 and 2% HS differentiation media and fix 1 x 96wp (plate 8413)
  * D1D: Feed DOLLY12 WCB cells (daily wells only)
  * D2D: Feed DOLLY12 WCB cells (all wells)
  * D3D: Feed DOLLY12 WCB cells (daily wells only)
  * D4D: Feed DOLLY12 WCB cells (all wells) and fix 1 x 96wp (plate 8414)
  * D5D: Feed DOLLY12 WCB cells (daily wells only)
  * D6D: Feed DOLLY12 WCB cells (all wells)
  * D7D: Feed DOLLY12 WCB cells (daily wells only) and fix 1 x 96wp (plate 8415)
  * D8D: Feed DOLLY12 WCB cells (all wells)
  * D9D: Feed DOLLY12 WCB cells (daily wells only)
  * D10D: Fix remaining 1 x 96 wp (plate 8416)


Key Findings


Refer to Results and Data Analysis.


Discussion and Limitations


Experimental Overview

In 4 x 96wps, 40 wells (B3 to F10) were seeded with DOLLY12 WCB cells at a
density of 2000 cells / cm2 (640 cells / well). 20 of these wells were fed
with the different E6 conditions (5 different feeding conditions each with 4
replicates), with the remaining wells fed using 2% HS in an identical manner.
The four plates were fixed at different time points (Day 0, 4, 7 and 10) to
record the progression of cell survival and maturity during the
differentiation process. At Day 10, after the final plate was fixed, all of
the plates were primary, secondary and DAPI stained and imaged using the
Zaber. The images were analysed using a macro that quantified DAPI and MyoG
counts, as well as MF20 area (which effectively represented areas where
myotubes / intracellular myosin heavy chain was present).

  

Cell Survival

[E6] Across the 10 days, there was an initial increase in the DAPI counts for
the E6 feeding conditions at Day 4, a decrease at Day 7, with the counts
plateauing by Day 10. The initial increase in counts may be attributed to the
cells retaining some proliferative capacity even after being switched into
differentiation media*. At Day 7, the decrease in the number of cells is
suggestive of non-optimal handling conditions and / or contamination of the
aliquoted E6 media.

[HS] At Day 4, there was a significant decrease in the number of cells in the
wells corresponding to the 100% HS feeding conditions (this included the wells
that were fed daily and every second day, ESD - refer to the bottom graph in
Figure 1). Since the HS conditions were meant to serve as our positive
controls, close to complete cell loss here may invalidate / weaken any
findings found in this experiment. Several factors could have led to the cell
loss experienced, including contamination of the HS media and operator-related
handling errors (e.g. removing 100% of the supernatant could have dried up the
wells). Keeping this in mind, it is crucial that the experiment be repeated to
ensure meaningful comparisons can be made in the future. Overall, the other HS
feeding conditions also showed an increase in the DAPI counts at Day 4,
returning to a baseline value by Day 7 of differentiation (*this is likely due
to the same reasons stated above).

  

Myogenin Expression

[E6] An increase in the proportion of MyoG+ cells over the 10-day period was
observed in two main conditions: 50% E6 Daily and 50% E6 ESD (Figure 2). This
suggests that lower volume media changes at a lower frequency may promote the
differentiation of DOLLY12 WCB MuSCs.

[HS] Due to the loss of cells in the 100% HS feeding conditions, normalising
the MyoG counts with the DAPI counts resulted in an artefact where the MyoG :
DAPI was amplified. As such, the effect of the 100% HS feeding conditions on
the expression of MyoG could not be accurately quantified. In terms of the 50%
HS feeding conditions, there was no observable increase in the expression of
MyoG with time. This result was once again unexpected since HS was selected as
the positive control in this experiment. As such, a meaningful comparison
between the E6 and HS 50% feeding conditions could not be made.

  

Myotube Formation / Myosin Heavy Chain (MyHC) Expression

[E6] Similar to the trend observed with regards to myogenin expression over
time, there was an increase in the normalised MF20 area in the 50% E6 ESD
condition (Figure 3). This trend was not reliably seen in the 50% E6 Daily
condition, further reinforcing the idea that a lower feeding volume and
frequency may promote myotube formation and maturation.

[HS] Once again, due to the loss of cells in the 100% HS feeding conditions,
normalising the MF20 area with the DAPI counts resulted in an artefact where
the normalised MF20 area was increased. The effect of the 100% HS feeding
conditions on the expression of MyHC could not be accurately quantified. In
terms of the 50% HS feeding conditions, there was no observable increase in
the expression of MyHC with time.

  

Summary and Limitations

The 50% E6 ESD feeding condition showed the most reliable increase in the
maturation markers (MyoG : DAPI and normalised MF20 area) that were used for
this study, as evinced by Figure 2 and 3. Although the 50% HS feeding
conditions did not show any increase in the expression of MyoG or MyHC (which
was expected from the positive control), the cells remained viable across the
10-day period, allowing for comparisons to be made with the 50% E6 feeding
conditions.

Significant cell loss was observed in the 100% HS feeding conditions (between
Day 0 and 4) which may be attributed to some form contamination of the HS
media and / or operator-related handling errors - although this is still
uncertain. A potential step that could be implemented for next time is to
image all the wells everyday, so that the timeframe in which the cell loss
event may have taken place can be narrowed. Replicate variability was also
high and could have been due to the nature of the training experiment (i.e.
errors related to technique may have occurred more frequently). Macros were
also an ongoing blocker which prevented any quantitative analysis from being
conducted. Further optimisation in the way images are captured and analysed
may yield more reliable results.

To conclude, despite not having reliable control conditions, the results
indicate that a lower feeding volume and frequency may be more beneficial for
cell survival and maturity, thus, disproving the initial hypothesis.


Future Directions


  * Repeat the experiment to verify that the 2% HS acts as a positive control (in terms of the expression of maturation markers), and that cells fed using this media survive the differentiation process
  * Evaluate the suitability of E6 differentiation media on other primary cell lines
  * Design an experiment to study the effect of different handling conditions on cell survival

  





