

Batch Overview

Batch Goals:

  * Optimisation: Improve upon previous experimental findings and continue to find new ways to increase batch yield in adherent cultures 

Experimental Questions:

  1. Is an overall seeding density of 5kcells/cm2 or 10kcells/cm2 better for co-culture in roller bottles?
  2. Are Myoblast effects more pronounced when seeded at a ratio of 4:1 (Myoblasts:Fibroblasts)?

Reasons for Investigating these Questions:

  1. Fibroblasts are seeded into roller bottles at 15kcells/cm2. An ideal seeding density has not yet been determined for co-cultures, therefore we tested 2 overall densities, 5kcells/cm2 (closer to normal myoblast only seeding density) and 10kcells/cm2 (closer to fibroblast only seeding density) to see which performed better in roller bottles. Both of these conditions were seeded with a ratio of 4:1, Myoblasts:Fibroblasts.
  2. We did not observe any obvious effects from the Myoblasts in the previous co-culture/roller bottles experiment, therefore we decided to seed myoblasts and fibroblasts at a ratio of 4:1. The rationale was that if Myoblasts have an different effect on the final yield, it should be more pronounced with a higher population. 

  

Experiment Timeline:

    
  

Full Batch Summary:

P1: Roller bottles seeded from WCB vials  

  * 5kcells/cm2: 17 proliferation days (10 days in VitC + TGFb treatment)
  * 10kcells/cm2: 9 proliferation days (2 days in VitC + TGFb treatment)

Experimental Outcomes:

* Graph 1 shows the average pellet weight per roller bottle for each seeding density (n=2). Error bars display SD  
* Graph 2 shows the number of proliferation days (days between seeding and harvest) for each condition.  
* Graph 3 shows the number of days each condition was treated with TGFb + VitC before peeling or harvest.

  

Conclusions/Answers to Experimental Questions:

1\. Is an overall seeding density of 5kcells/cm2 or 10kcells/cm2 better for
co-culture in roller bottles?

5kcells/cm2 is the ideal seeding density for co-cultures in roller bottles.
This seeding density condition remained attached to the flask surface and did
not peel for the entirety of the experiment resulting a long treatment period
and a high final yield. 10kcells/cm2 on the other hand peeled after 2 days in
treatment and therefore had to be harvested, resulting in a lower final yield.

2\. Are Myoblast effects more pronounced when seeded at a ratio of 4:1
(Myoblasts:Fibroblasts)?

No. The highest yield produced by these co-cultures was 1.5929g this is very
similar to the highest yield produced by Fibroblasts alone in Batch 15
(1.5252g). These cultures also experienced a similar number of proliferation
days (17 days:co-culture, 16 days:Fibro ONLY) and treatment time (10 days:co-
culture, 9 days:Fibro ONLY), therefore the addition of Myoblasts in these
cultures does not seem to have any obvious effect on final yield.

Photos:

10Kcells/cm2:

5kcells/cm2:

Overall Key Findings:

  * 5kcells/cm2 is the ideal seeding density for co-culture when seeded at a ratio of 4:1 (Myo:Fibro)
  * The addition of Myoblasts does not have any obvious effect on the final yield

  


