

Discussion with Ira Deveson from the Garvan Nanopore sequencing facility
(Genomics Technologies group: https://www.garvan.org.au/research/kinghorn-
centre-for-clinical-genomics/research-programs/genomic-technologies) regarding
the use of Nanopore for our transcriptomics and feasibility of developing
capacity in-house.

To discuss:

•    Ongoing projects

o    Multiomic comparison across species - Nanopore sequencing for
transcriptomic (rather than short read seq (e.g. Illumina))

o    Profiling of the transcriptomes of cells undergoing fast suspension
adaptation (with Marie) to understand cell stress responses that occur after
adaptation

•    What we need to know?

o    Is an in-house nanopore sequencer worthwhile in comparison to
outsourcing?

o    Would they help in advisory capacity in setup?

o    Scale of what would be needed (e.g. MinION, GridION, PromethION)

•    Future uses for Vow?

o    SNP profiling in key genes (e.g. tumor suppressor genes)

o    STR profiling

o    In-house transcriptomics

•    Data analysis

o    Back-end base calling - who and how?

o    Front-end alignment - outsource or in-house?

•    Other?

o    cDNA seq, cDNA-amplification + seq and direct RNA seq?

  

Outcomes:

•    Service remains open for any transcriptomics that we may need (did not
discuss discounts for larger scale…)

•    Price is slightly higher than short-read sequencing (Illumina at GWCCG),
but we will better pick up transcript isoforms and variants (potential
alignment with proteomic isoform specific data??)

o   also, because no PCR amplification is required, transcript reads are
highly quantitative

•    Ira suggests that an in-house sequencing platform (especially something
low-throughput like a single minion) might be more hassle than worth for
library preps, optimisation, in-house base-calling etc. and that outsourcing
is probably cheaper because of ONTs graded price structure

o    e.g. $790USD per flow cell for 12, ~$500USD per flow cell for 48

o    On this note, promethION costing for them is a total of $450k (AUD) -
mostly flow cells

•    Advisory is possible - but seems they would prefer to keep the facility
relationship (understandably)

•    MinION alone would be worthwhile for smaller scale, regular work, such as
SNP or STR profiling, but not enough for transcriptomics (read depth needs
etc.)

•    Their data analysis service includes the base-calling and QC - they will
then give us a fastq file and a report

o    Willing to help with first time alignments by sharing linux/unix commands
for 'Minimap'

o    Great paper comparing ONT approaches for processing and analysis:
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.04.21.440736v1.full.pdf

•    Need to send them the data from Garvan Molecular Genetics (RNA conc.,
cDNA conc.)

  


