Background


Currently, Vow has staining capabilities for immunofluorescence using
antibodies that will mark transcription factors MyoD, Pax7, MyoG and the
cytoskeletal protein marker Myosin heavy chain. Myosin heavy chain, stained
for with an anti-MF20 antibody, is commonly used to visualise myotube
formation. However, it produces a weak signal when conjugated to an AF555
secondary antibody. This results in difficulty understanding the cytoskeletal
structures such as striations seen along myotubes. Filamentous actin (aka
microfilaments) are proteinous components found universally in eukaryotic
cytoskeletons. In this EPIC we aim to develop a suitable fluorescent stain for
f-actin and assess its muscle-specificity.


Results Summary


The Phalloidin-iFluor 488 stain (Abcam) is suitable for staining f-actin,
showing the cytoskeletal structure of our cells. As per Figure 1., the
fluorescent signal comparing the 20-minute and 30-minute incubations of the
cells in Phalloidin-iFluor-488 (1:1000 in dPBS) shows that either 20 or 30
minutes of incubation are suitable to obtain a clear signal.

Biologically, the signal of the f-actin stain in the cells differentiated in
2% HS (horse serum) is stronger than that of cells differentiated in E6 media.
This indicates that actin production is media-dependent for differentiating
Myoblasts.


Discussion


Staining for f-actin is achievable with the Phalloidin-iFluor-488 stain and
provides great detail of cytoskeletal structure, showing alignment and
distribution of cellular cytoplasm. The stain is easy-to-use (1:1000 dilution
in dPBS) and requires a 20-30 minute incubation at room temperature. The stain
is not muscle-specific, as seen in Figure 2., overlaying the 488 and 555
channel images for each well demonstrates that phalloidin is present in every
cell, whereas myosin heavy chain is isolated to specific myotubes.

Whilst there is some bleed-over of the phalloidin stain into the 555 channel
(when imaged), the phalloidin stain results in a strong signal showing
intricate cytoskeletal structures. Therefore, it is not recommended to co-
stain for MF20-AF555 alongside Phalloidin-iFluor-488 to avoid this bleed-over
of signals. Alternatively, the concentration of the phalloidin stain could
possibly be reduced to avoid the strong bleed-over (as it is more obvious in
the strong signal samples than those with a weaker signal).

Biologically, the results indicate that E6 differentiation media is less
effective at encouraging f-actin synthesis compared to the 2% HS
differentiation media. This observation is out of the scope of this
experiment, but will be included in future directions to assess why this may
be the case.


Limitations


  * This experiment did not include a negative control
  * This experiment stained only BUFFY6 cells, and therefore the stain has not been assessed in other species cell lines (however f-actin is highly conserved so it is assumed that the stain will work for all eukaryotic cells)


Next steps

  * Determine why the intensity of the signal is much higher in the 2% HS samples compared to the E6 samples.
  * Assess the effectiveness of this stain on cells from multiple species.
  * Design ImageJ macros to use the f-actin stain to determine alignment of cell directionality.
  * Test out the stain at a lower concentration to determine whether this will mitigate the bleed-through of signal to the 555 channel.
  * Develop an SOP for Phalloidin-iFluor-488 staining.


