Rational for our strategy


We have limited time to achieve the scientific breakthroughs required to
launch a first product in singapore by the end of 2022.

In the next 3-6 months, we need to have cells growing in a scalable fashion at
the 2L bioreactor level at Vow. We will then need to tech transfer these cells
to our manufacturing partners at Ester Asco in Singapore, who will assist with
the subsequent scale-up.

Cells growing in a scalable fashion is a problem with multiple potential
solutions. The next few months will aim to scientifically determine which
solution is most feasible by kicking off a variety of projects. The projects
support and compliment each other, and aim to arrive at a scalable growing
cell population in the shortest possible time. Any questions about this
technical brief, please direct to Katie Day.  
  
Project Bucket aims to de-risk the assumption that single cell suspension
culture is the most efficient method of growing cells at scale (Project GM
CHOMP, Project Media Optimisation, Project SCC). This project focuses on
growing cells in suspended aggregates.These suspended aggregates should form
spontaneously based on ingredients added to the culture media, and thus
little-to-no additional upstream or downstream processing beyond that required
for single cell suspension culture should be required. As an additional part
of this project, commercial cell lines will be assessed for whether they might
make a feasible first product.  
  
Project Egg aims to de-risk the assumption that a muscle-based fibroblast,
which has been isolated from highly adherent-reliant conditions, is capable of
growing in suspension (Project GM CHOMP, Project Media Optimisation, Project
SCC). JUST and Nuvonis both have grown fibroblast cell lines from eggs in
suspension, so there is precedent here that would work for our purposes. We
will be isolating embryonic fibroblast cell lines from a range of species,
which should be immortalised due to their embryonic nature. These cell lines
may also be naturally suspension adapted, given the microenvironment of the
egg compared to microenvironment of the firm muscle tissue.

Project GM  CHOMP aims to de-risk the assumptions that 1) our muscle CHOMP
fibroblasts are capable of going into suspension at all (Projects Media
Optimisation, Bucket) and 2) that we can isolate CHOMP cells from an egg in a
timely manner (Project Egg). CHOMP fibroblasts isolated from muscle will be
genetically modified to manipulate key genes associated with adaptation of
cells from adherent to suspension culture. These cells will also be
genetically modified to make them immortal. If we are able to achieve a GM
suspended CHOMP fibroblast, we can immediately begin scale-up and media
optimisation using this cell line, while simultaneously performing single cell
cloning on our non-GM, heterogenous CHOMP fibroblast cell line to obtain these
genetic modifications by random chance (achieving a non-GM fibroblast line in
suspension essentially becomes a numbers game, with genetic variants all being
sorted into the optimised media) (Project SCC).  
  
Project Media Optimisation is our most likely chance of a "quick win" that
builds on all of the research at Vow into single cell suspension work over the
past six months. Cell cycle analysis and RNA transcriptomics will "shine a
light" into why our current cells being adapted to suspension are dying during
the process. This data should provide information to allow Project GM CHOMP to
succeed more quickly. In addition, by understanding why the cells are dying,
we may be able to add in additional media ingredients to "save" the cells from
death or to "kick-start" their proliferation. This also could involve an
attempt to return to more automation-friendly formats. Switching to CO2-free
media could allow us to avoid pH changes.  
  
Project SCC aims to scale-up our capabilities to perform SCC further. We have
previously achieved some promising signals using a forced suspension
adaptation + cloning protocol with our CHOMP muscle fibroblasts. This project
assumes achieving a suspension-adapted cell line is a numbers game and if we
can ramp numbers of clones that we process to a sufficiently high number (1
million+) then we will be able to go to market with a suspension-adapted
muscle cell. Project GM CHOMP and Project Egg may also require SCC
capabilities, and this project aims to maximise those capabilities.  
  
External to Vow, microcarrier work will continue at the Melbourne lab. We also
will try to bring our packed bed bioreactor work in house.  
  
  




1\. Project Bucket.  
Lead: Victoria.  
Additional core members: James H, Addy.

Key goals: (WIP)  
1\. Determine whether encapsulated growth of croc muscle fibroblasts is a
feasible strategy to pursue for our first product.  
2\. Attempt to grow a range of commercial cell lines (e.g. nuvonis
fibroblasts) in bioreactors to see whether a commercial cell line is a
feasible strategy to pursue for our first product.  
3\. Order in 3x different types of bioreactors to begin generating some early
data around which bioreactor is best fit for purpose. This may include the
packed bed bioreactor for adherent culture.  
  
Assumptions and Risks: (WIP)  
1\. De-risks the assumption that single cell suspension is the most
optimal/quickest way to a first product.  
2\. Assumes that encapsulated aggregate suspension will not involve additional
downstream processing during harvest.  
3\. Assumes the texture of encapsulated aggregate suspension will allow for
less intensive downstream processing on the product team side.


