Key Result(s)
  
  
  * A total of 4 biopsies were collected. 2 biopsies were collected from the vastus lateralis and 2 from the biceps femoris.
  * On day 14 in culture, adherent cell populations were first observed in WALLE02 and WALLE04 (derived from vastus lateralis biopsies, with the cell isolations performed on the day of the biopsy)
  * No adherent cell population was established for WALLE03 or WALLE05 (derived from biceps femoris biopises, with the cell isolations performed on the day following the biopsy)
  * WALLE02 and WALLE04 underwent 2 passages. WALLE04 cell numbers did not increase between passages, while WALLE02 numbers actually decreased. 
  * WALLE02 and WALLE04 had very few cells re-adhere to the culture vessel following their 2nd passage and the remaining population did not proliferate. 
  * WALLE02 and WALLE04 were terminated after 40 days in culture due to stunted proliferation. 


Discussion of Results


2 biopsies were collected from the vastus lateralis and 2 from the biceps
femoris. Tissue digestion and cell isolations were performed on the vastus
lateralis samples on the day of biopsy, while the biceps femoris samples were
processed the following day, after being stored in refrigerated collection
media overnight. All samples were processed following Vows standard procedures
for the biopsy and isolation of primary cells from mammalian tissue (See SOP
here: https://www.notion.so/vow/VSOP-074_0-Digestion-of-animal-derived-
biopsies-and-the-isolation-of-cells-in-vitro-for-mammalian-
ce-42595d10fc5d47e0b6754d8f1049d32b). The crude homogenate from each biopsy
was split into 4 portions, with ¾ of each being cryopreserved, and the
remaining ¼ placed into immediate culture in DMEM/F12 + 10% FBS + 1x P/S at
37°C and 5% C02.  
  
After 14 days in culture, adherent cells with a fibroblastic morphology were
observed in both the cultures derived from the vastus lateralis biopsies
(WALLE02 and WALLE04) however no adherent cells were observed in the biceps
femoris cultures (WALLE03 and WALLE05). The vastus lateralis samples were
processed immediately after biopsy, while the biceps femoris was not processed
until 24 hours later. It is unclear if the difference in cell yield was due to
the delaying in processing for biceps femoris, or because of differences in
the cells derived from different tissues. The 14 day lapse between the initial
seeding of isolate, and our first observations of adherent cells was
unexpected, as adherent cell populations normally establish within a week of
plating isolate.  
  
WALLE02 and WALLE04 cultures underwent 2 passages, the 2nd being performed
after 29 days in culture. Following this 2nd passage, very few cells re-
attached to the vessel, and proliferation ceased. Given these cells took
approximately 30 minutes to Trypilise during passages, it is possible that the
cells were irreparably damaged during this process.  



Limitations


Conditions for the isolation and culture of wallaby cells were not optimised
during this experiment. We followed Vows standard isolation and culture
conditions which were developed for use with mammalian cells. A number of
factors may have played a role in our failure to successfully establish a
WALLE MCB in this instance. These include the isolation protocol itself, the
time lapsed between the animals death and the collection/processing the
biopsy, the muscle origin (biceps femoris/ vastus lateralis or others),  the
culture media used, as well as passaging protocols.


Conclusion(s)


While we were successful in establishing an adherent cell population from 2 of
our 4 biopsies, we were unable to maintain these cells in long term culture
and to expand them to a population of  >15M cells in order to bank an MCB.
This suggests that our current isolation and culture conditions are not
optimised for use with adherent primary cells derived from wallaby muscle
tissue. A thorough literature review examining isolation and culture
techniques for marsupial primary cells should be performed before conducting
the next wallaby biopsy. It is possible that our current techniques and media
conditions, which were originally designed for mammalian cells, are not
suitable for the isolation and culture of  primary cells derived from
marsupial tissue.


Future Direction(s)


As we have been unsuccessful in generating an MCB of adherent  wallaby cells
in this instance, a literature review should be performed in order to
determine if our isolation and protocols can be optimised for future marsupial
biopsies. A new wallaby should then be sourced, and another biopsy and
isolation should be carried out.


