Key Result(s)


  * All cultures were discarded during the contamination gate incident (post-mortem)
  * Unable to determine if the anti-adherence solution prevents CHOMP_09 fibroblasts from adhering onto the culture-ware surface as a feasible alternative to ULA plates
  * Unable to determine if a feeding strategy of once every 30 days post FACS sorting is feasible
  * Unable to determine if seeding at a higher density during the FACS sort is advantageous during the suspension adaption/cloning process


Discussion of Results


Context/Background

Single cell cloning is the process by which a population of cells can be
generated from a single parent cell, thus resulting in a genetically
homogenous population. Vow's standard approach involves initially seeding
plates with single cells, imaging them over a course of 10 days, followed by
serial passaging until the cells reach a density suitable to be stored as
cryo-banks. Recently there have been attempts to combine suspension adaptation
and cloning by sorting adherent cells into ultra low attachment plates (ULA).
A recent experiment attempting to replicate this process indicated that the
cells require ~30 days to reach a confluency in a well of a 384 ULA plate
suitable for passaging. However there is a significant time involvement during
this 30 day period which involves replenishing the growth media and Zaber
imaging. Therefore the purpose of this experiment was two fold:

  1. Comparing feeding strategies (every 10 days vs every 30 days), to reduce the hands on time required to keep the cells fed
  2. Seeding density (1 cell per well vs 5 cells per well), 

In addition due to the lack of ULA plates the 20 plates used for this
experiment were coated with anti-adherence rinsing solution; a surfactant
solution for pre-treating culture-ware to reduce surface tension and prevent
cell adhesion.

  

Discussion of results

Unfortunately, all of the cultures belonging to this experiment were discarded
prematurely during the contamination-gate incident. Subsequently, this meant
that we were unable to:

  1. Determine if a feeding strategy of once every 30 days post FACS sorting is feasible
  2. Determine if seeding at a higher density during the FACS sort is advantageous during the suspension adaption/cloning process
  3. Determine if the anti-adherence rinsing solution was a feasible alternative to ULA plates in preventing cell attachment. 


Limitations


Despite this experiment being terminated prematurely, the current method used
to gauge cell performance over time (Zaber imaging) remains to be an
insufficient method to observe cells in ULA plates.


Conclusion(s)


Unable to assess aims and hypothesis of the study, due to experiment being
terminated prematurely due to contamination gate.


Future Direction(s)


At the time of writing this report, suspension cloning has since been
deprioritised as crucial for the launch of a first product, but continues to
be critical for Vow's long term strategy.


