

Written by: Andrew


Background


A major focus for the suspension culture adaptation pipeline is to develop a
high-throughput platform to maintain and monitor large numbers of suspension
cultures. A critical requirement for this purpose is the ability to generate
cell counts in an upscalable and reproducible manner to enable large-scale
screens of culture conditions to determine the optimal workflow for the
generation of suspension adapted cell lines. The currently used workflow for
attaining cell counts involves staining cells with fluorescent nucleic acid
stains that are either permeable (total cell counts) or impermeable (dead cell
counts) to live cell membranes. Stained cells are then imaged using the Zaber
automated fluorescence microscopy imaging system. Cell counts are then
automatically generated using the image processing tool FIJI, that is able to
identify and count "cells" from the captured images. Previous experiments have
identified Hoechst Readyflow to be an appropriate live nuclear stain for this
workflow due to its ability to stain cells with high contrast and produce
counts that are comparable to counts obtained via trypan blue exclusion.  
  
However, as seen in recent suspension culture experiments, Readyflow at times
appears to cause the formation of precipitate that is visible in the DAPI
channel during Zaber microscopy. This in turn can impair the accuracy cell
counts obtained from the automated FIJI macro. Combined with its relatively
high cost it was deemed necessary to explore cheaper and more reliable
alternatives.


Key results


1\. At a final concentration of 5 ug/mL both Hoechst trihydrochloride
trihydrate as initial powdered stock or in solution produced comparable image
quality to Hoechst Readyflow when imaged under the DAPI filter.

2\. Readyflow staining can result in false positives during cell counting,
likely due to precipitate/fluorescent particle formation.

3\. Both solid and solution Hoechst trihydrochloride trihydrate products,
particularly when used to stain cells without dPBS dilution, produced
comparable cell counts in suspension cultures grown in media that did not
contain phenol red (CD CHO).

4\. Hoechst trihydrochloride trihydrate as powdered stock is the most cost
effective option, with the lowest cost/unit and cost/sample.




Graphpad Prism Analysis:
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1XOR7KEUnrMsR6Qc3xDoukc1AXxMQ-f3W/view?usp=sharing


Discussion


Image quality

In a qualitative assessment of microscopy images, cells that were stained with
Hoechst Readyflow fluoresced brighter when imaged under DAPI in DMEM/F12
cultures compared to both Hoechst trihydrochloride trihydrate products (Figure
1). However, there was an apparent increased level of background fluorescence,
that was particularly evident in samples of CD CHO cultures. Furthermore,
visible precipitate was only observed in wells stained with Readyflow (Figure
2). This phenomenon has been observed in previous experiments where Readyflow
was used for cell imaging and enumeration.

Cell Counts  
In DMEM/F12 control suspension cultures that had noticeably fewer cells and
more cell clumping, staining with Hoechst Readyflow generated higher total
cell counts compared to the other two stains.(Figure 3). This disparity was
less pronounced in CD CHO culture cell counts (Figure 4). In addition, for all
Hoechst products, generally higher cell counts were obtained when concentrated
stain was applied directly to cells without PBS dilution in both DMEM/F12. For
2 of the CD CHO cultures (8640 and 8641) cell counts were comparable between
all 3 stains, particularly when used undiluted to stain cells (Figure 4). All
dilutions of Hoechst trihydrochloride trihydrate solution failed to stain
cells and produce cell counts.  
  
A side by side comparison of undiluted Hoechst trihydrochloride trihydrate and
Hoechst Readyflow staining during routine suspension culture monitoring,
Hoechst Readyflow produced higher cell counts although differences between
cell counts were found to be non significant (unpaired ttest, p=0.0582)
(Figure 5). It is a possibility that staining with Hoechst Readyflow can
produce false positive signals explaining the higher cell counts obtained.
Review of the debugging files of the Readyflow stained samples showed that the
precipitate formed during Readyflow staining was being identified as cells by
the ImageJ macro, and were included in the cell count (Figure 6). Note the
irregularity of some of the counted "cells" that are not consistent with usual
nucleus appearance. The potential for Readyflowto produce false positives was
further shown when Readyflow was added to DMEM/F12 media that did not contain
cells (Figure 7). Despite the absence of cells, visible particles were
observed from microscopy images and were even counted by the automated macro,
resulting in a cell count of 1,720 cells/mL. This phenomenon has been
previously described in the literature, where Readyflow alongside SYBR Green 1
stains produced fluorescent colloidal particles in the absence of DNA
(Dlusskaya et al. 2019).

  
Additional data was obtained from EPIC28384 to compare counts obtained from
manual trypan blue exclusion counts vs Hoechst trihydrochloride trihydrate
staining during the seeding of 6 DOLLY suspension cultures. Cell counts
between both methods were comparable and not significantly different (unpaired
t-test, p=0.2796) (Figure 8). This data further suggests that Hoechst
trihydrochloride trihydrate (solid) staining is suitable for accurate cell
counting.  
  
Cost

Solid Hoechst trihydrochloride trihydrate is the most cost effective option in
comparison to the other Hoechst stains (Table 1). On a cost per sample basis,
the reconstituted Hoechst powder when used at a final concentration of 5 ug/mL
is 100 times cheaper than the Hoechst solution and 7000 times cheaper than
Hoechst Readyflow at the working concentration used (12.3 uL/sample). At an
economic level, where the desired purpose is to analyse a large number of
suspension cultures the price point alone justifies the use of the solid
Hoechst trihydrochloride trihydrate over its more expensive counterparts.




Table 1. Reagent cost for the three trialled Hoechst stains. Cost was
calculated based on a sample volume of 100 uL of suspension culture. Hoechst
Readyflow working concentration is based on concentrations that were used for
previous suspension experiments.

ReagentCost/unitUnit sizeNumber samples/unitCost/sample  
Hoechst trihydrochloride trihydrate (powder)$199100 mg200,000 (5 ug/mL final
concentration)$0.0001  
Hoechst trihydrochloride trihydrate (solution)  
$26710 mg/mL20,000 (5 ug/mL final concentration)  
$0.01  
Hoechst Readyflow$3105 mL406.5 (12.3uL/sample)$0.76  
  
  

  




Figure 1. Comparison of Hoechst trihydrochloride trihydrate and Hoechst
Readyflow staining to enumerate cells in suspension cultures (EPIC25749)




Figure 2. Visible precipitate under 5x magnification when suspension cells
cultured in DMEM/F12 media were stained with Hoechst Readyflow. Cells were
stained at a final concentration of 5 ug/mL and 12.3 uL/mL for Hoechst
trihydrochloride trihydrate(solid and solution) and Hoechst Readyflow
respectively.




Figure 3. Comparison of cell counts of DMEM/F12 cultures obtained from
staining with 4 different concentrations of Hoechst trihydrochloride
trihydrate (reconstituted solid stock),  Hoechst trihydrochloride trihydrate
(solution) and Hoechst Readyflow.  
Figure 4. Comparison of cell counts of CD CHO cultures obtained from staining
with 4 different concentrations of Hoechst trihydrochloride trihydrate
(reconstituted solid stock),  Hoechst trihydrochloride trihydrate (solution)
and Hoechst Readyflow.




Figure 5. Comparison of total cell counts obtained from staining with
concentrated Hoechst trihydrochloride trihydrate (solid) (5 ug/mL) or Hoechst
Readyflow (3 drops/mL). n=1  
  

Figure 6. Debug images from automated cell counts of cells stained with
Hoechst Readyflow.

Figure 7. Precipitate was observed in a negative control, when Hoechst
Readyflow was added to DMEM/F12 media with no cells at a concentration of 3
drops/mL. Well C11, Plate 9018.




  

Figure 8. Comparison of cell counts obtained via manual trypan blue exclusion
vs Hoechst trihydrochloride trihydrate (solid) staining (n=6). Counts were
obtained from the seeding of F_DOLLY12 cells  for the commencement of
EPIC28384.

  


Limitations


1\. Due to low cell counts and the presence of aggregates/precipitate from
suspension cultures trypan blue counts were unable to obtained to be used as a
comparator to determine cell count accuracy.  
2\. These suspension cultures have relatively low cell number, resulting in
sample variance that may explain differences in cell number for some of the
tested stain conditions.

3\. At the time, the cultures used for this experiment were valuable. To avoid
oversampling from a single culture, multiple cultures were used as technical
replicates which made comparisons challenging.

4\. Dilutions of the Hoechst trihydrochloride trihydrate solution failed to
stain, it is possible this was a result of human error while making the
dilutions.

  


Conclusions


 Hoechst trihydrochloride trihydrate (solid) is the best choice of the Hoechst
33342 stain products tested for cell counting in high throughput suspension
culture workflows.


Next steps


1\. Edit suspension culture (https://au-
mynotebook.labarchives.com/share/Templates/NzM0LjV8MTE3MTM1LzU2NS9UcmVlTm9kZS8yNzU4NjI3ODQyfDE4NjQuNQ==
)and Hoechst staining for clone picking ( https://au-
mynotebook.labarchives.com/share/Templates/NzU2LjZ8MTE3MTM1LzU4Mi9UcmVlTm9kZS8zMjAzNjY1NjQxfDE5MjAuNg==
) lab book templates to include staining protocol using Hoechst
trihydrochloride trihydrate (solid)  
2\. Compare counts to Trypan Blue exclusion method to confirm and further
improve staining method accuracy.  
3\. Test the staining method on another cell type, preferably a proliferative
suspension culture, against the Trypan Blue exclusion method.


References


Żurek-Biesiada D, Kędracka-Krok S, Dobrucki JW. UV-activated conversion of
Hoechst 33258, DAPI, and Vybrant DyeCycle fluorescent dyes into blue-excited,
green-emitting protonated forms. Cytometry. 2013;83A:441-451\. doi:
10.1002/cyto.a.22260.

Karg TJ, Golic KG. Photoconversion of DAPI and Hoechst dyes to green and red-
emitting forms after exposure to UV excitation. Chromosoma.
2018;127(2):235-245. doi:10.1007/s00412-017-0654-5  
Dlusskaya, E. A., Atrazhev, A. M. & Ashbolt, N. J. Colloid chemistry pitfall
for flow cytometric enumeration of viruses in water. Water Research X 2,
100025 (2019).

  








