Quick summary of main findings


In comparison to 2% HS differentiation media, both WCB and MCB DOLLY12 cells
in E6 experience experience extreme cell loss by Day 10 of differentiation,
regardless of the passage number of the cells. Therefore, it is unlikely that
the cells are detaching from the surface of the cell culture vessels due to
senescence of late-passage cells, as suspected.


Discussion


Cell loss has been witnessed repetitively throughout 2021 Q3, leading to a
full Cell Loss Investigation in 2021 Q4. DOLLY12 WCB cells were used for all
differentiation assays, and regularly experienced cell loss which inhibited
valuable data retrieval from each experiment. For this reason, a controlled
differentiation assay was composed for DOLLY12 MCB and WCB cells to be
differentiated side-by-side to determine whether senescence of late passage
cells was the cause of such extreme cell loss. All cells were exposed to the
same Growth media, the same differentiation media (each cell line had 8 x E6
biological replicates for each time point and 8 x 2% HS biological replicates
for each time point).

  * E6 = differentiation media made in-house (Essential 8 Medium mix, minus FGF and TGFb) made as per this recipe
  * 2% HS = DMEM/F12 + 2% Horse Serum + 1x P/S differentiation media

1 x plate containing 8 x wells in E6 (for both WCB and MCB cells) and 8 x
wells in 2% HS media (for both WCB and MCB cells) were fixed for each cell
line at Day 0, Day 4, Day 7 and Day 10 of differentiation to obtain a clear
indication of cell numbers at regular intervals over 10 days. Once all plates
were fixed, cells were stained with DAPI and imaged on UV (on the Zaber
imaging platform). Images were run through a suspension DAPI counting macro
that was more suitable for the images obtained than the originally used 'zaber
DAPI' macro, which uses FIJI (Fiji Is Just ImageJ), which results in a total
cell count output for each well. The data was then used to calculate mean
values and standard deviation of each condition. The data was then fed into
GraphPad/Prism 8 to generate Graph 1.

Key findings from visualising the graph indicate that DOLLY12 cells in E6
experience notable cell loss between days 4 - 10 of differentiation,
regardless of whether they are from the MCB or WCB.

Due to the fact that all cells were exposed to the exact same media, fed at
the same time and handled by the same operator (each day) and all of the cells
in E6 experienced similar cell loss to what has been witnessed previously, it
is clear that the way E6 is currently formulated is not optimised for DOLLY12
cell survival over 10 days of culture.


Limitations


  * This experiment did not contain a non-DOLLY12 control cell line to determine whether the E6 was the problem, however based on results from this experiment comparing multiple species in E6, there is already an indication that this cell loss issue is specific to DOLLY12.
  * It is possible that both the MCB and WCB cells are experiencing the same cell loss as a result of their in vitro age, and perhaps cells at a lower passage than the MCB may have survived longer. Without access to those cells, we will rely on the data presented.


Future Directions

  * Stop using DOLLY12 cells in E6 for differentiation assays.
  * Perform media optimisation experiments to optimise differentiation media to support cell survival of DOLLY12 MuSCs (optional, if deemed a priority).


Conclusion


When comparing DOLLY12 MCB and WCB MuSCs over 10 days of differentiation,
DOLLY12 cells in E6 differentiation media suffer the greatest cell loss
regardless of their passage number. The extreme cell loss witnessed appears to
be a consequence of the relationship between DOLLY12 cells and E6 media,
rather than cell senescence.


