Aim


To determine the optimal feeding rate to maximise cell survival in DOLLY12
MuSC differentiation, using both E6 media and 2% HS media.


Hypothesis


The current 100% daily feed with E6 differentiation media may be a
contributing cause to the cell loss observed during Q3 and prior.


Background:


This experiment was aimed at troubleshooting the observed cell loss during Q3
and prior, as it is extremely important for us to have cells able to survive
differentiation and maturation in order to meet company-wide objectives.
Common practice is to perform 100% media change on a daily basis during our
differentiation assays. It is well-known that cells communicate with
themselves and with each other through the secretion of autocrine and
paracrine molecules respectively, and that these signalling pathways play
important roles in basic cell functions including cell survival, proliferation
and fusion, as well as cell death. Our current feeding regime replenishes the
nutrients up-taken by cells and removes their waste products on a daily basis
however, may also be removing autocrine and paracrine signalling molecules
secreted by cells into the media. This may be a contributing factor to the
observed cell loss during Q3 and prior. For this reason we decided to evaluate
the effect of six different feeding regimes on cell survival and
differentiation of DOLLY12 WCB cells in E6 and DMEM + 2%HS (control). For both
E6 and 2%HS, the feeding regimes consisted of a 50% or 100% media change
either on a daily basis or every second day, as well as a negative control
that did not experience media change throughout the differentiation assay (0%
feed).


Summary of events:


  1. D1: Thaw DOLLY12 WCB cells and seed into 3 x T175 
  2. D2: Feed DOLLY12 WCB cells with growth media
  3. D4: Passage DOLLY12 WCB cells into 4 x 96 wp
  4. D6: 50% feed DOLLY12 WCB cells with growth media
  5. D0D: Change to E6 and 2%HS differentiation media and fix 1 x 96wp
  6. D1D: Feed DOLLY12 WCB cells
  7. D2D: Feed DOLLY12 WCB cells
  8. D3D: Feed DOLLY12 WCB cells
  9. D4D: Feed DOLLY12 WCB cells and fix 1 x 96wp
  10. D5D: Feed DOLLY12 WCB cells
  11. D6D: Feed DOLLY12 WCB cells
  12. D7D: Feed DOLLY12 WCB cells and fix 1 x 96wp
  13. D8D: Feed DOLLY12 WCB cells
  14. D9D: Feed DOLLY12 WCB cells
  15. D10D: Fix remaining 1 x 96 wp


Key results and findings:


See Results and Data Analysis section.


Discussion and limitations:


Cell loss was observed in numerous occasions during Q3 and prior in our main
primary cell line, DOLLY12 cells. In this experiment we aimed to determine the
optimal feeding regime to maximise cell survival in differentiation assays
using DOLLY12 MuSC. For this reason, a controlled differentiation assay was
composed for DOLLY12 cells. All cells were exposed to the same growth and
differentiation media (either 2%HS or E6), and were handled by the same
operator.

1 x 96 well plate containing a total of 20 wells in E6 and 20 wells in 2%HS
differentiation media were fixed at Days 0, 4, 7 and 10 of differentiation.
Once the experiment was finalised, cells in the fixed plates were stained with
DAPI and imaged on the Zaber. The data obtained after processing the images
through a DAPI counting macro was used to calculate the mean and standard
error of each of the feeding conditions. This data was then input into R and
used to create the graphs that can be found in Results and Data Analysis.
Cells were also stained with MyoG and MF20 to evaluate the effect of the
different feeding conditions on DOLLY12 cell differentiation and maturation.

DOLLY12 cells experienced a noticeable decrease in cell numbers in 2%HS media
between days 0 and 4 of differentiation in all feeding conditions. This is a
rare finding however, there are several reasons that could explain it. The
first one being a possible contamination of the 2%HS differentiation media
with ethanol and/or copper sulphate. The reason behind this is that the cell
numbers in the 0% feeding condition, which was the only condition that did not
experience any media change throughout the differentiation assay, increased
after day 4 of differentiation, indicating some degree of cell recovery.
Nevertheless, this is highly unlikely given the media required to perform
feeds was aliquoted on a daily basis from the 2%HS stock bottle into smaller
urine pots. The second reason could be harsh operator handling however, if
this were the case, a similar issue would have been observed in the plates
containing E6 differentiation media. Thus, the most probable explanation for
the cell loss observed in 2%HS is the incorrect formulation and preparation of
the 2%HS stock by operators.

Regarding the plates containing E6 differentiation media, at day 4 of
differentiation both the daily and every second day 100% feeding conditions
contained the greatest number of cells amongst all. At day 7 of
differentiation, the number of cells in these feeding conditions drastically
decreased, suggesting harsh handling conditions, contamination of the
aliquoted E6 differentiation media or the drying out of cells. At day 10 of
differentiation, the 0% and the two 50% feeding conditions had a greater
number of cells when compared to the two 100% feeding conditions.
Nevertheless, there is a lot of variability between replicates (see the SE
bars in Graph 2) in the former conditions, making it difficult to accurately
conclude that the 0% and the two 50% feeding regimes result in greater cell
survival during differentiation than the two 100% feeding conditions.

Moreover, there was an increasing trend throughout the differentiation assay
in MyoG expression in the 0% feed in 2%HS differentiation media potentially
indicating transition of the cells in these wells from proliferating myoblasts
to differentiating myotubes. Given the observed cell loss in the rest of the
feeding conditions in 2%HS differentiation media, it was expected to observe
none to very little MyoG signal in these wells. Furthermore, in E6
differentiation media the two 100% feeding conditions showed the greatest MyoG
expression amongst all feeding conditions at day 4 of differentiation;
however, this expression dropped at day 7 of differentiation, potentially as a
result of the observed drop in cell numbers. At day 10 of differentiation, the
two 50% feeding conditions had the greatest MyoG expression.

The data also showed <1% expression of MHC in the 0% feed in 2%HS
differentiation media by day 10 of differentiation. Once again, given the
observed cell loss in the rest of the feeding conditions in 2%HS
differentiation media, it was expected to observe none to very little MHC
(detected with the MF20 antibody) signal in these wells. In E6 differentiation
media, there was a consistent expression of MHC amongst all feeding conditions
both at day 0 and day 4 of differentiation. It is worthwhile mentioning that
throughout the differentiation assay, there was an increasing trend in MHC
expression in both the 50% daily and every second day feeding conditions.

Given the cell loss observed in the plates containing 2%HS differentiation
media, it is very difficult to evaluate which one of the feeding conditions
resulted in the greatest DOLLY12 cell survival during differentiation and
maturation of DOLLY12 cells. For more accurate results, it is suggested to
perform this experiment again and normalise the obtained data against cell
count. It would also be interesting to further investigate whether or not
there are signalling molecules secreted by cells into the media that are
important for cell survival as well as differentiation and maturation in order
to determine whether there should be changes made to our current daily 100%
media change.


Future direction:


\- Make sure we do not lose the cells in our 2% HS control plates throughout
the differentiation assay, as this will allow us to accurately evaluate the
suitability of E6 as a differentiation media for DOLLY12 cells

\- Evaluate the suitability of E6 on other primary cell lines

\- Perform this experiment again in order to obtain accurate results that can
then dictate our feeding rate and schedule in the lab

-Perform significance statistics on this data set

-Optimise our image processing Macro given this has been one of the major blockers in the write up of this final report 


