Aim


To determine whether cell death observed in myogenic differentiation in Q3 and
prior is a result of pipetting, temperature of the media, drying out of cells
and/or their interaction.


Hypothesis


Assessing the effect of each individual condition (ie. pipetting, media
temperature, drying out of cells) and their interaction will allow us to
determine which factor, if any, is contributing to the observed cell death
during Q3 and prior.


Background:


This experiment was designed to determine whether operator handling was a
contributing cause to the cell loss observed during Q3 and prior. C2C12 and
DOLLY12 WCB cells were thawed and exposed to the same growth media during
proliferation. They were then seeded into 12 x 96 wp, 6 x 96 wp per cell line.
For each cell line, three 96wp were changed to E6 differentiation media and
the remaining three were changed to 2% HS differentiation media, with the
intention of fixing these plates at three different time points. Whilst
performing daily feeds, cells were handled in eighteen different ways. The
handling conditions consisted of a combination of one of two possible
pipetting forces, one of three possible media temperatures and one of three
possible feeding regimes. By exposing both DOLLY12 WCB and C2C12 cells to
these different handling conditions and their interactions we aimed to
determine which handling condition, if any, was the root cause of the cell
loss observed during Q3 and prior. We used C2C12 cells as a control to further
validate our results as being a more robust cell line, if a particular
condition affected these cells, it would likely affect any other primary cell
line.


Summary of events:


  1. Thaw C2C12 and DOLLY12 WCB cells and seed into 6 x T175 
  2. Seed C2C12 and DOLLY12 WCB cells into 6 x 96 wp each
  3. 50% feed 6 x 96 wp C2C12 plates and 6 x 96 wp DOLLY12 WCB plates
  4. D0D For each cell line fix 1 x 96 wp 
  5. D0D For each cell line change 2 x 96 wp to E6 differentiation media and 2 x 96 wp to 2% HS
  6. D1D 100% feed
  7. D2D 100% feed
  8. D3D 100% feed
  9. D4D For each cell line fix 1 x 96 wp 2% HS and 1 x 96 wp E6 differentiation media
  10. D4D For each cell line 100% feed 1 x 96 wp 2% HS and 1 x 96 wp E6 differentiation media
  11. D5D 100% feed
  12. D6D 100% feed
  13. D7D Fix remaning 4 plates


Key results and findings:


See Results and Data Analysis section.


Discussion and limitations:


Cell loss was observed in numerous occasions during Q3 and prior, hindering
the progress of the Science team in studying different ways to develop and
culture mature muscle. DOLLY12, as well as C2C12 cells, were used for all
differentiation assays in Q3 and prior. In this experiment we aimed to
determine whether different handling conditions had an effect on cell survival
to understand whether operator technique may have contributed to the witnessed
cell loss. For this reason, a controlled differentiation assay was composed
for DOLLY12 and C2C12 cells. All cells were exposed to the same growth media,
as well as differentiation media (2%HS or E6).

1 x 96 well plate containing 54 wells in E6 and 1 x 96 well plate containing
54 wells in 2%HS were fixed for each cell line at Day 0, Day 4 and Day 7 of
differentiation. Once the experiment was finalised, cells in the fixed plates
were stained with DAPI and imaged on the Zaber. The data obtained after
processing the images through a DAPI counting macro was used to calculate the
mean and standard error of each of the handling conditions. This data was then
input into R and used to create the graphs that can be found in the Results
and Data Analysis section. Cells were not stained with neither MyoG nor MF20
given the cell loss observed in DOLLY12 cells in E6.

The data plotted in the graphs indicate that DOLLY12 cells experienced cell
loss in E6 differentiation media throughout the 7 days of differentiation in
all handling conditions. This suggests that E6 may not be the most suitable
differentiation media for DOLLY12 cells, in accordance to what was found in
the Assessment of different species in differentiation final report. The
number of DOLLY12 cells in 2%HS differentiation remained mostly consistent
amongst all handling conditions throughout the 7 day differentiation assay,
with the exception of the 'Forceful pipetting, feed immediately' and 'Forceful
pipetting, aspirate most of the media and feed immediately' in cold media and
the 'Forceful pipetting, aspirate most of the media and feed immediately' in
warm media.

C2C12 cells also experienced a reduction in cell numbers in the different
handling conditions between day 0 and day 4 in 2%HS differentiation media and
to a lesser extent in E6 differentiation media. This could be a result of the
over-confluence of C2C12 cells leading to cell detachment in the form of blobs
or aggregates. The cell numbers at day 0 of differentiation in the 'Gentle
pipetting, aspirate most of the media and feed immediately' condition is
bizarre when compared to the rest of the handling conditions however,
accurately captured in the images analysed by ImageJ macro.  
  
Contrarily to what was reported in the Failed attempts Report, there is no
noticeable difference in the number of DOLLY12 cells in wells treated with RT,
warm or cold media, suggesting that the media temperature does not have an
effect on cell survival. There is no consistent effect of pipetting force on
cell loss across media temperature and type of feeding ((1)aspirate all the
media and feed immediately, (2) aspirate most of the media and (3) feed
immediately and aspirate the media, wait 10 seconds and then feed). Similarly,
there is no consistent effect of type of feeding on cell loss across media
temperature and pipetting force. These results suggest that our primary cells
are more robust than what we think and that operator handling may not have
been the root cause of the cell loss observed during Q3 and prior.


Future direction:


\- Compare these results to the results obtained in the Failed attempts Report
to understand why we may have obtained differing results

\- Our primary cells are more robust than we think and, even if consistent
techniques and protocols should be followed when handling our cells (ie. time
used to warm up our media, avoiding fast and harsh pipetting etc.), obvious
cell loss will not be observed in our plates if, for some reason, we do not
handle our cells with care during a particular feed (however, this should NOT
be common practice)

\- Avoid using DOLLY12 cells in E6 differentiation media

\- Optimise differentiation media by planning DSD experiments including new
factors

  


