Introduction


Perhaps the one of the most important characteristics of Vow's research is the
high-throughput manner it must be conducted. Unsurprisingly, most of our
research accomplishments at Vow have been made possible by the various high
throughput platforms and tools provided by the Engineering team. One such tool
is the liquid handling robots (Opentron II or OT2) which have the potential to
automate the vast majority of manual pipetting that scientists perform
routinely. In the past, these robots have shown to be able to automate routine
tasks with great success (e.g. suspension feeds, single cell cloning passaging
etc.)

The bulk of manual tasks for the maturation team in particular involve the
daily maintenance of cultures. These daily media changes are simple liquid
transfer routine tasks that have the potential to be automated on the OT2.
However, when dealing with live muscle cells, a some measures must be taken to
ensure high cell viability, growth and differentiation. Along with
straightforward liquid handling, these measures also must be translated to the
OT2.

The first iteration of this experiment depicted that cultures fed on the OT2
were slow to differentiate and mature in comparison with manually fed plates.
This slowing points to an issue inherent to the feeding event specifically in
the OT2. This could be due to pipette flow rates, labware specific issues,
however it was suspected that the low working volumes and incomplete media
changes could be the potential reason behind slow differentiation in C2C12s.
Hence, this experiment addresses this by assessing a range of working volumes
for the differentiation process for both manual and automated feeds.


Summary of experiment


  * Two 96 well plates were seeded with BUFFY6 cells and differentiated for 9 days in E6 media.
  * One plate was fed daily on the OT2 and the other fed daily, manually in a BSC. Both plates had each column fed with a working volume ranging from 100-200uL.
  * Both plates were immunostained for MyoG and MF20 and imaged.


Key findings
  
  
Figure 1: A comparison of percentage well area occupied by MF20 signal
expressed by cells fed manually in a BSC and on the OT2.

Figure 2: A comparison of percentage of cells that are MyoG positive fed
manually in a BSC and on the OT2. Percentage has been calculated by
normalising MyoG counts to DAPI counts for each well.


Discussion:
  
  
  

Immediately it is clear that despite having an excess of E6 media an
inherently slow maturation process is still observed with cells fed on the
OT2. Hence, an issue pertaining to media availability and incomplete media
changes is likely ruled out as a range of working volumes was assessed. It was
hypothesised that if incomplete media changes was the dominant issue, cells
fed on the OT2 with an excess of fresh media would eclipse the effect of
residual media remaining. Moreover, recent preliminary results in the
maturation team have suggested that high feed frequencies may in fact have a
detrimental effect on maturation. Hence, the issue of incomplete media changes
may even have reason to be beneficial (as opposed to detrimental) to
maturation, thus lowering the likelihood of this issue producing the effect
seen in the graphs above.

Interestingly, this points towards several other potential underlying reasons
behind slow maturation observed in cells fed on the OT2. The inherent
difference between each feeding condition include:

  * The labware used to hold fresh media the cells are exposed to.
  * The flow rates of the automated and manual multi-channel pipettes (although the automated pipette flow rates have been customised to be slower than manual).
  * Tilting of plates during feeding.
  * Incomplete media changes.
  * HEPA filter differences.

It is possible that there is something inherent to the OT2 labware and/or it's
treatment which affects live cell culture. For example, when performing media
changes on the OT2, the media is kept in autoclavable reservoirs which may
have been exposed to detergent. It is possible that the autoclaved labware is
not completely free of detergent when used - hence affecting maturation. The
other reasons outlined above are less likely, however may need to be tested to
confirm.

As depicted by Figures 1 and 2, a stark difference in the percentage MF20 area
and myogenin positive area is observed between the automated and manual
feeding conditions. This is seen somewhat with the comparison of myogenin
positive cells between the two conditions, however the discrepancy is
elucidated more vividly when comparing MF20 area. It is hypothesised that as
the cells begin to differentiate, a percentage of cells will be myogenin
positive and of those cells a percentage will express a family of myosin
proteins. This may be a possible reason behind the larger discrepancy seen in
MF20 area when compared to %MyoG positive cells. It is important to note that
the graphs above depict a high amount of biological variability between each
replicate (as evidenced by high standard deviations). While this may be the
expected biological variability with our myoblast cultures, this may also be
due to the fact that the MCB/WCB vials may not be homogenous populations of
myoblasts and the cell types of our R&D cell lines remain to be characterised.
Thus, it is unclear whether the entire well population is myogenic and this
may differ from replicate to replicate.

This experiment also aimed to determine the optimal working volumes for
cultures for both manual and automated feeds. It is clear from Figures 1 and
2, no optimal working volume can be confidently deduced due to the overlapping
error bars between working volumes. Interestingly the graph depicts that the
%MyoG trends observed from increasing working volumes are reflected the same
in MF20 signal. This observations reinforces the validity of our cell
behaviour as expression of both maturation markers (myogenin and myosin heavy
chain) align with one another. This is not a conclusive observation however,
as the standard deviation overlap is quite high between working volumes,
giving any trend observed between volumes less credibility.

Indeed there is a smaller standard deviation in maturation within cultures fed
on the OT2 when compared to manual feeding conditions, however it is likely
that this is largely due to smaller values generating less spread.

  


Limitations


  * A positive control of 2% horse serum containing media was not used. Biological effects seen between feeding conditions could be potentially masked by cell responses specific to E6 media.
  * Imaging exposure times and antibody dilution result in darker images that are run through the ImageJ analysis pipeline. Although the images and data were cross-checked for validity and accuracy, this may have given rise to some of the high spread between replicates.
  * WCB cultures expanded and used to seed this experiment have not been fully characterised as homogenous myogenic myoblasts which also may contribute to the spread depicted between replicates.


Conclusion


In summary, an excess/adequate of media did not address the gap in maturation
observed between automated and manual feeding, suggesting nutrient
availability may not be the underlying reason behind this phenomenon.
Alternative avenues to investigate such as labware or process specific reason
may provide some clarity. Moreover, a high variability is seen within
replicates calling attention to the need for homogenous R&D cell lines and
further work on a standardised and an ImageJ analysis compatible imaging
workflow.


Future directions


  * Investigation into list of potential reasons behind slow maturation in automated feeding conditions.
  * Incorperation of more controls within experimental conditions and plate maps.
  * Prompt discussions on homogenous cell lines for R&D use.


