Key Result(s)
  
  
Post revival cell numbers were highest for cells in FBS +DMSO (424K) followed
by Cryostor (412K) and then DMSO-free Cryostor (340K)

Post-thaw doubling time  
At the first passage, 6 days after thaw, the cell doubling time was shorter
for those preserved in DMSO-free Cryostor, followed by standard Cryostor and
then FBS+ DMOS freeze media.

Freeze mediaCell Doubling time (days)  
DMSO-free Cryostor  
1.97  
Cryostor  
2.8  
FBS +DMSO  
3.82  
  
  
  
  


Discussion of Results


Broadly speaking, these results indicate that Cryostor does not have a
negative impact on cell viability and proliferation immediately post thaw,
when compared to Vows inhouse freeze formulation of FBS +20% DMSO. In fact,
Cryostor, in particular DMSO-free Cryostor, appears to have an advantage over
FBS +20% DMSO in this regard. As Cryostor is chemically defined and animal
component free, it is preferable to FBS based media from a QMS perspective.
The removal of DMSO is also desirable due to its known cytotoxic affects.

  


Limitations


Experimental design flaws

As this study was performed opportunistically with the limited cells available
to crudely look at the affects of different freeze medias on cell viability
and post-thaw proliferation. While it does give us a broad overview,  the
significance of these results are questionable given N=1 for each group.
Variations in the number of cells revived from thaw for example, may be due to
incidental variations in cell numbers initially added to the vial prior to
freezing, rather than solely due to differences in the cytotoxicity of the
cryoprotectants. In addition, cell numbers were obtained by performing a
single count, without replicates and therefore may not be truly representative
of the sample. Cell doubling times were also calculated for the first passage
post-thaw only, and we did not examine possible affects of each cryoprotectant
after serial passaging of cells in longer term culture.  


Conclusion(s)


Although it is not possible to make statistically significant conclusions from
these results, it is apparent that Cryostor and DMSO-free Cryostor do not have
a negative impact on cell survival and proliferation immediately post thaw.
This is good news for Vow, as it supports the use  of DMSO-free Cryostor for
the cryopreservation of our CHOMP cells. As this is a chemically defined,
animal component + DMSO-free freeze media, it has great advantages over FBS
containing media from a QMS perspective.


Future Direction(s)


On the basis of these results, Cryostor does not appear to have a negative
impact on CHOMP cell survival and proliferation post thaw, and tentative
results indicate that it performs better than our inhouse formulation of FBS
+10% DMSO. CHOMP MCB and WCBs should therefore be stored in a Cryostor freeze
medium in future.


