

Performed by: Bonnie Tangey







Incubator details  
  
Egg incubator model is the Flyline 36 Egg Incubator with Auto Turner.  
  

After setting up the incubator, it became apparent that it is not possible to
closely moderate it's humidity. Humidity can be altered only by adding more or
less water to the water tray, which fluctuates as water evaporates. An
environmental monitor was placed in the incubator to track humidity, and we
attempted to maintain this at between 50-70% (optimal humidity for early avian
egg incubation is within this range), however it did occasionally drop as low
as 40% or rise as high as 80% for periods of several hours at a time before
somebody was able to attend to it. This may have affected embryonic survival.




Embryo survival and use  
Fertile pigeon, Cayagu duck, Japanese Quail, Bobwhite Quail and chicken eggs
were all sourced for use in this study. None of the pigeon eggs developed
while in the incubator however, which was likely due to the fact that the
embryos were already partially developed when they were posted to us
(partially developed embryos are unlikely to survive shipping, and should
therefore be collected from the nest within a day of being laid if they are to
travel). 4 chicken and 2 duck embryos survived to day 10 of incubation.
Unfortunately we had a generalised contamination event at this time, which
resulted in a 2 day lab closure. For this reason, the duck and chicken eggs
could not be used. We attempted to repeat the incubation using 6 fertile eggs
from each species which had been stored in the fridge for 10 days. None of
these embryos survived to 10 days development. As the Japanese Quail and
Bobwhite quail eggs arrived at Vow, and were put into the egg incubator at a
later date than the duck and chicken, they were not affected by the lab
closure and could be used. 12 eggs from each species were incubated. Embryos
from 5x Bobwhite quail and 3x Japanese Quail eggs survived to day 9 of
incubation, at which point they were sacrificed for cell isolations.




Candling All performed by Bonnie Tangey.  

Candling involves holding a bright torch to the shell of an egg (while in a
dark room) so that the internal structures of the egg can be visualised, and
the stage of embryonic development determined. We used a iPhone light rather
than a commercial candler as this was sufficient for our needs.  
  
For each species, egg candling was performed on day 5-6 of incubation as well
as on day 9-10, as well as immediately prior to use. Embryos that had failed
or ceased to develop were discarded at these time points. This is done to
prevent possible egg explosions which can occur when gasses accumulated in the
degrading dead embryo.  

  * Any embryos without visible vascular development  were discarded (infertile).
  * Embryos with a detached air cell were discarded
  * Eggs with large cracks were discarded (possible source of contamination)
  * Eggs showing signs of embryonic death were discarded (eg. blood rings, lack of separation between yolk and albumin, greatly enlarged air cells)  
  
The image bellow shows the typical appearance of chicken embryos during normal
development, as seen when candling. Image taken from
https://incubatorwarehouse.com/egg-candling  
  
  
  


