Key findings:


  * Semi solid growth medium formed by the addition of methylcellulose to growth media can prevent cellular adhesion onto culture surfaces in 96-well plates
  * Fluorescent stains may be difficult to utilise in methylcellulose supplemented cultures, presumably due to its extreme viscosity that may prevent diffusion of stains into cells
  * This experiment represents the first attempt in which CHOMP_09 fibroblast cells were FACS sorted as well as cloned into 384 ultra-low attachment plates
  * Use of ultra-low attachment plates in static culture may be a useful alternative to explore further in adapting cells to "suspension-like" conditions due to observing CHOMP "cell" proliferation
  * Addition of pluronic F-127 and anti clumping agent appear to be beneficial during the cloning and suspension adaptation process. The control plate did not include these components and no "cells" were observed 
  * Hoechst staining alternatives need to be determined due to its potential cytotoxicity and inability to be removed effectively from suspension cultures. See future directions for suggestions
  * Machine model trained using suspension image (see experimental report here) performs poorly in identifying cells from Zaber captured images
  * Unable to rely on existing single cell cloning protocols used for adherent cells to be directly applicable for suspension cloning, namely the use of Zaber imaging to observe cells in suspension and hoechst staining. See future direction for suggestions 


Results/Discussion:


Background/Context:

  

The purpose of this experiment was to evaluate if ultra low attachment (ULA)
plates and/or coatings were a suitable alternatives to adapting primary CHOMP
fibroblasts to suspension culture in the process of single cell cloning (SCC).
Traditional suspension adaptation experiments have primarily been applying the
pharmaceutical approach to suspension adaptation. Wherein, this approach
involves transferring adherent cells into a shaking vessel and culturing the
cells until viable proliferation is achieved. However challenges relating to
shear stress and media hydrodynamics results in an environment unsuitable for
the survival of adherent cells in suspension conditions. Therefore this
experiment sought to evaluate the use of ULA plates and coatings in adapting
CHOMP fibroblasts to suspension in static culture.

  

  

Prior to FACS sorting CHOMP fibroblasts into 384 ULA plates, several low
attachment coatings such as agarose as well as media supplements such as
methylcellulose (MC), poloxamer 188 and pluronic F-127 were evaluated as
alternatives to commercial ULA plates. Agarose coated plates were prepared by
dissolving agarose in ultrapure water (MilliQ) and allowing the solution to
solidify in the wells of a 96-well plate. The pluronic, poloxamer and MC
supplements were directly dissolved in growth media at the required
concentration, then sterile filtered and immediately seeded with CHOMP_09
fibroblast cells. Unfortunately within the first 24 hours the agarose gel had
dissolved into the media and could no longer serve as a low attachment
coating. However this may have been due to preparing the agarose in MilliQ
instead of DMEM media as the original protocol suggested. From the remaining 3
treatments both the pluronic and poloxamer were insufficient in preventing
cells adhering to the well surface even at a 1% concentration solution (images
not shown). However cultures supplemented with MC between 0.3% - 1% were able
to prevent cellular adhesion and resulted in cells being "suspended" in the
growth medium, with 0.45% MC indicating the most promising results (Figure 1).
Nonetheless cultures supplemented with higher concentrations of MC appeared to
have a substantial amount of debris present (Figure 2, Figure 3). It is likely
that using the current method outlined in the experimental plan is
insufficient to enable all the MC powder to dissolve, thus accounting for the
presence of particulates (Figure 2, Figure 3). In addition, to determine
whether the fibroblast cells were viable in the cultures supplemented with
0.1-1% MC, all conditions were stained with hoechst and sytox. Unfortunately
no hoechst nuclei or sytox stained cytoplasmic signals were detected on either
DAPI or AF488 fluorescence channels, irrespective of the MC concentration
(0.1-1%). Currently, the prevailing assumption is that the medium was too
viscous to enable sufficient diffusion of these molecules into the cells.
However this hypothesis was unable to be proven correct, without the inclusion
of a positive control with growth media lacking MC during the staining
procedure. Nonetheless, taken together these results indicate that MC may be a
suitable alternative to include to approximate semi solid media culture to
adapt fibroblasts to suspension.

  

  

  

  

Figure 1: Phase contrast microscopy of CHOMP_09 fibroblasts in growth medium
supplemented with MC (0.45%). 10x objective

  



Figure 2: Phase contrast microscopy of haemocytometer cover slip of growth
media sample containing 1% MC, indicating the presence of undissolved MC . 10x
objective

  

  

Figure 3: Phase contrast microscopy of haemocytometer cover slip of growth
media sample containing 0.45% MC, indicating the presence of undissolved MC.
10x objective

  

In addition to the ULA coating experiment optimisation, CHOMP fibroblasts were
also separately FACS sorted into commercial 384 ULA plates. Of the two media
conditions evaluated, one was supplemented with pluronic F-127 and anti
clumping agent, in addition to the basal media (RPMI + 20% FBS + 1X P/S).
Previous adherent cloning experiments consist primarily of an initial FACS
sort, followed by monitoring of the cultures using Zaber scanning for
approximately 10 days. Following this time period fibroblast cells are
sufficiently confluent to be expanded to larger vessels, in this case a
96-well plate. Eventually, following successive passages into larger vessels,
the clonal population is cryobanked in liquid nitrogen. Regrettably, cells
were extremely difficult to detect using Zaber scanning on days 1-3, even
within the corner wells that were sorted with 15 cells. Compared to adherent
fibroblast, it remains unclear what morphological characteristics cells in
suspension should display, given the lack of a control cell line such as
CHO-S. Moreover, despite training a machine learning (ML) to identify cells
approximating the morphology of those in suspension, the ML model performed
poorly in identifying cells from the 384 ULA plates based on the example set
of images it was trained on (experimental report). Following 16 days in
culture, both 384 well plates were stained with hoechst to confirm the
presence of CHOMP fibroblasts under fluorescence. However no fluorescent
signal could be observed from either plate. As the CHOMP fibroblast cells may
have been proliferating, albeit slowly, the plates were left in culture until
either a viable population was observed or an alternative to hoechst stained
was determined. Following manual observation on day 24 the appearance of
"cell-like" objects was confirmed, likely approximating the morphology and
size of CHOMP fibroblasts (Figure 4). As the hoechst staining reagent was
accidentally left in the culture media it precipitated out of solution
potentially compromising the viability of any cells present. Therefore any
cell population in a well containing >5 cells (26 wells total) were passaged
into a new 384 ULA plate to remove the hoechst debris that precipitated out of
the medium. Furthermore, cells were only detected in the plate supplemented
with ACA and pluronic, indicating that these additives may be advantageous to
include when adapting CHOMP fibroblasts to static suspension conditions.

  

  

Figure 4: Phase contrast microscopy of cell-like objects approximating the
size and morphology of CHOMP_09 fibroblasts in and ULA well plate. 20x
objective.

  

In order to conclusively determine whether the objects observed in the 384
well plate with ACA and pluronic were cells, a sacrificial well was stained
with hoechst and subsequently Zaber imaged. In addition a negative control
well, which contained cells from an already existing suspension culture was
included. Unfortunately there were inconsistent results from the staining
process. The "cells" stained with hoechst did not appear to fluoresce under
the DAPI channel, whereas the negative control exhibited several auto
fluorescing artifacts, despite not being stained with any fluorescent reagents
(Figure 5, Figure 6). In light of these results these cultures were instead
imaged once a week and manually checked if the population of "cells" continued
to proliferate. Unfortunately as time progressed, particulates appearing
similar to microbial contamination were observed, and therefore the plates
were discarded after 63 days in culture. Therefore, it may be plausible that
the apperance of the cell-like objects on day 24 was potentially a microbial
contamination.

(a)
(b)

  

Figure 5: Phase contrast and DAPI channel images of "CHOMP fibroblasts" in ULA
well plate stained with hoechst. (a) Phase contrast image, 5x objective. (b)
Hoechst stained nuclei imaged under DAPI fluorescence channel, 5x objective.

(a)
(b)

  

Figure 6: Phase contrast and DAPI channel images of CHOMP fibroblasts obtained
from an existing suspension culture not stained with Hoechst. (a) Phase
contrast image, 5x objective. (b) non-hoechst stained nuclei exhibiting auto-
fluorescence under DAPI channel, 5x objective.


Limitations:


Fundamentally this experiment was unable to confirm whether the objects
observed from day 24 were in fact CHOMP_09 fibroblast cells. Despite the
indications of cell proliferation the inconsistencies observed from hoechst
staining and the lack of controls made this question difficult to answer. By
extension this has made it difficult to preclude if this approach of sorting
fibroblast cells into 384 ULA plates is a viable alternative to the fast
suspension approach. Separately, it remains unclear if the use of hoechst
staining compromised the viability of the CHOMP "cells". Its mechanism of
action involves intercalating with cellular DNA, potentially interfering with
cellular division. Suitable alternatives include live stains that are commonly
used to track cell proliferation or assay testing. Moreover, the protocol
previously used for adherent SCC is not directly applicable to suspension
cells. Wherein, there were significant difficulties in identifying cells
during the Zaber imaging, namely being unable to set the proper microscope
focus. Additionally, several complications arising from hoechst staining and
the difficulties in removing stains present in suspension cultures exemplified
that adherent SCC protocols are not suitable for suspension SCC.


Conclusion:


Despite FACS sorting CHOMP_09 fibroblast into 384 ULA for cloning and
suspension adaptation, we were unable to confirm if the cell-like objects
observed after 24 days in culture were conclusively fibroblasts. In spite of
various shortcomings, including Zaber imaging and hoechst staining these
results highlight a potential avenue for further exploration for suspension
adaptation in static conditions. Whilst the use of 384 ULA plates appears
critical for this process, substitute methods to track the performance of
suspension clones across a certain time period is highly required.  


Future Directions:


  * Find alternatives to Zaber image scanning and hoechst staining in order to quantify the presence of cells. Suitable alternatives include live/dead stains with lower cytotoxicity or metabolic assays. See limitations section for rationale.  
  * Continue evaluating the effectiveness of several ULA coatings and semi-solid mediums such as agarose, methylcellulose and poloxamer
  * Repeat FACS sorting of CHOMP fibroblasts into 384 ULA plates to confirm this process is feasible in generating CHOMP fibroblasts capable of proliferation in suspension like conditions


