Key Result(s)


  * CHO-S cells were able to survive and proliferate in all treatment conditions (i.e., MilliQ, RO, ultrapure distilled, industrial distilled) 
  * All treatment conditions were either equal to or performed better than the control (MilliQ) in terms of total cell numbers after 8 days in culture, doubling times and cell pellet weight. 


Discussion of Results


The purpose of this experiment was to evaluate whether reconstituting Hycell
CHO media in different water types would affect the survivability and
proliferation of CHO-S cells. MilliQ ultrapure type 1 water is the standard
water type used when reconstituting commercial powdered media. However it
requires a significant amount of equipment, such as an ion bed exchanger and
carbon filters in order to produce. Commercially produced ultrapure,
industrial distilled water are cheaper to procure and do not require the
equipment in house to produce. However CHO-S cells have not been grown in
powdered media reconstituted in these water types.

  

Cell count samplings of CHO-S cells in each of the water treatment conditions
highlighted that cells were able to survive and ultimately proliferate,
irrespective of the water type used to reconstitute the Hycell CHO powder
(Figure 1). In addition, all conditions displayed relatively equal cell
numbers across each of the sampling timepoints. Cells grown in ultrapure
distilled Hycell media continuously displayed the highest cell counts closely
followed by industrial distilled, reverse osmosis and finally MilliQ.
Following 8 days in continuous culture cell counts ranged between 450 and 600
million across the 4 treatments (Figure 1). Doubling time calculations
emphasised that the ultrapure distilled treatment had the lowest doubling
time, however the difference observed was marginal. In order to correlate cell
numbers to cell yield each of the conditions were pelleted and weighed for a
final mass. As expected, the ultrapure distilled flasks demonstrated the
largest pellet mass with the reverse osmosis, industrial distilled and MilliQ
pellets trailing closely behind (Figure 3). Taken together this highlighted
that the water type used to reconstitute the Hycell CHO powder did not affect
the ability of the CHO-S cells to survive and proliferate.

  

Figure 1: Growth of CHO-S cells in Hycell CHO media reconstituted in different
water conditions. n=1.

Figure 2. Doubling times of CHO-S cells grown in Hycell CHO media
reconstituted in different water conditions.

  

Figure 3. Pellet weights of CHO-S cells grown in Hycell CHO media
reconstituted in different water conditions.


Limitations


Given that only a n=1 sample size for each treatment was used, no statistical
analysis could be inferred from the data gathered. Therefore we can not
determine if the results obtained are statistically significant from each
other.


Conclusion(s)


Preliminary results indicate that the water type used to reconstitute the
Hycell CHO powder did not affect the ability of the CHO-S cells to survive and
proliferate. All treatment conditions were either equal to or performed better
than the control in terms of total cell numbers after 8 days in culture,
doubling times and cell pellet weight.


Future Direction(s)


  * Evaluate different water types with the Nuvonis quail fibroblast suspension cells


