

While it is hard to be prescriptive with what a report should contain, there
are a few common points that all reports should consider. A report should
(almost) replicate the "Discussion" section of a journal article. The
following is a ROUGH guide with a suggested paragraph structure. PLEASE ensure
to include references to previously published work (or links to work conducted
here at Vow).

  1. What is the most important overarching finding? 
  2. A brief discussion of all results and how they fit into our final goal of producing an edible meat product (this section might be several paragraphs long and should put the results into the context of what has been done before). 
  3. Any limitations of the study, why might our results not be correct? 
  4. What is the overall conclusion? 
  5. Discussion of future directions.

***PLEASE NOTE, YOUR REPORT SHOULD BE FINALISED WITHIN TWO WEEKS OF COMPLETING
ALL EXPERIMENTAL WORK.***  




Overall conclusion

Cells differentiated less in E6 made from a frozen 'bullet' compared to E6
made fresh (as measured using percentage of MyoG positive cells).

  

n=6, ordinary one-way ANOVA + Tukey, ***p≤0.001, ****p≤0.0001



Discussion

An E6 'bullet' is a concentrated solution of E6 ingredients (transferrin,
insulin, L-ascorbic acid, sodium selenium) mixed in the correct ratios. The
use of this bullet was investigated as it would speed up the preparation of
our E6 differentiation media compared to mixing all 6 ingredients separately
each time.

We have performed a similar experiment previously (EPIC16716) where we used E6
made from a bullet that was made and used on the same day. This bullet did not
undergo freezing and was tested on C2C12 cells rather than primary cells. In
EPIC16716 the MyoG percentage of cells treated with the two E6 types was
similar which suggests that freezing the bullet impacts the media ingredients
such that cells aren't able to differentiate as well as they would in fresh
E6.

Limitations

We did not compare the percentage of MF20 area between different conditions in
this experiment.

Future directions

When there is a need to prioritize the development of an E6 bullet in the
future, we can investigate the impact of including different solvents such as
DMSO and ethanol into frozen bullets.  Additionally, we can experiment with
different concentrations of bullets, ranging from 10x-500x, to determine if a
less concentrated bullet will promote differentiation on par with fresh E6
media.


