

Background  
  
The following strategies will be explored as potential strategies to
upregulate myoglobin and hence, heme iron content in mature myotubes.
Identified media supplements and concentrations used in previous literature
are listed below. All supplements were used to treat cells 4-6 days following
the commencement of myoblast differentiation in DMEM/F12 + horse serum
differentiation media.  
  

CompoundWorking concentration Reference  
Taurine5-100 mMSeidel (2020)  
  
Lipid mixture2.5-5% (v/v)Schlater (2013)  
  
Caffeine5 mMGraber 1986  
  
Hemin1, 5, 10, 20 uMYokakawa 2021  
  
  
  


Introduction


Apart from haemoglobin, myoglobin is one of the major bioavailable forms of
dietary heme iron present in vertebrate muscle. Heme iron is an essential
nutrient from dietary proteins that are not otherwise found in plant-based
diets. This is a valuable consideration in the production and marketing of
cell culture-based meat production whereby we are given the unique opportunity
to potentially upregulate cellular heme iron content in a standardised
fashion, resulting in the potential presentation of our cells 'functional
food'.


Aim:


To increase cellular content of heme iron by upregulating myoglobin by
treating BUFFY myoblasts with different concentrations of taurine, lipids,
caffeine and hemin as demonstrated in previous literature


Hypothesis:


Supplementing differentiation media with taurine, lipid mixture, caffeine and
hemin will upregulate myoglobin and heme content of differentiated myoblasts.


Timeline and protocol:


Experimental plan: Taurine  
  
Table 1.Taurine concentrations to be trialled

ConcentrationAmount to be added to media (g)Volume of E6 media needed  
  
  
  


  
  
Experimental plan: Lipid mixture  
  
Table 2. Lipid mixture concentrations to be trialled

ConcentrationAmount to be added to media (uL)Volume of E6 media needed  
  
  
  


  
  
Experimental plan:Caffeine  
  
Table 3. Caffeine concentrations to be trialled

ConcentrationAmount to be added to media (g)Volume of E6 media needed  
  
  
  


  
  
  

  1. Aliquot 30mL of each of the media types made in the step above and warm them in a water bath at 30C for 20 minutes prior to use in the next step. Label each aliquot with the group # from above to tell them apart easily.
    1. prepare 2x aliquots of B12-free GM for flasks 4 and 5
  2. Thaw 1x cryovial (10M cells per vial) and quickly transfer into a larger GM volume
    1. e.g. 10 mL of warm GM for a cell conc. of 1M/mL
  3. Perform a cell count and record live and dead cell #'s.
    1. Calculate live cells/mL
  4. Seed the flasks for each group with 1,312,500 live cells/mL (this is equivalent to 7500 live cells/cm2). Place the seeded flasks directly into the 30C incubator (do not leave them in the BSC for 30 minutes).
  5. On day 4, perform a 100% media change using the remaining aliquot of media for each group.
    1.  At this stage, also switch the media in flask 4 to Media formulation 2
  6. On day 7, harvest cells and count the cells from each flask with trypan blue individually to assess cell survival and infer a proliferation rate via total cell number (compared to how many cells were seeded). Record for each B12 concentration condition total cell number, number of dead cells. Note - live cells do not take up Trypan Blue, but dead cells are permeable and take up the dye.
  7. Wash pellet 3x with ice cold PBS (IMPORTANT: to remove any unbound B12 and reduce assay background!!!)
  8. Freeze dry pellet at -80C until analysis


