Key findings:


  * No viable cell populations was observed in any of the six 384 ULA after 30 days in culture.
  * Centrifuging the plates prior to Hoechst staining enables majority of the Hoechst to be removed without disrupting or accidently aspirating the cells
  * Unclear if the cells taken from the existing suspension cultures were a viable population capable of proliferation to begin with, prior to FACS sorting.


Results/Discussion:


Following the promising results obtained from the first round of CHOMP_09
fibroblast suspension single cell cloning (SCC), this experiment sought to
replicate the process of adapting single cells to suspension in 384 ultra low
attachment (ULA) plates. To accomplish this 3 separate cultures of DOLLY_12
fibroblasts from an existing fast suspension adaption experiment were sorted
into 2x 384 ULA plates each. After 30 days in culture these plates were
stained with Hoechst, Zaber imaged and stained nuclei were manually counted to
determine how many cells were present in each well. Any promising culture that
exhibited signs of proliferation could then be passaged into a 96 ULA plate.

Similar to the first round of CHOMP fibroblast sorting into 384 ULA plates,
there were considerable difficulties in identifying suspension cells using
Zaber imaging. Namely due to the inability to properly focus onto cells as it
was unclear what a DOLLY fibroblast should look like in suspension,
constituted a significant blocker towards tracking cell proliferation. As a
result this method of tracking cell proliferation over time cells was
discontinued for this experiment. Instead all cultures remained in culture for
a total of 30 days after which all six plates were stained with Hoechst and
imaged using the Zaber. Heats maps for each plate were then generated, which
highlight the top 95% (including corner wells) of wells based on counts from
the stained cells. Majority of the wells contained within this top 5
percentile, exhibited counts of 2 indicating that the cells had doubled over
that time period, with several wells containing cell counts >2\. In order to
confirm if there were any viable population present, each well containing 2 or
more cell were manually examined. Unfortunately, there were no cell
populations present in any of the wells belonging to the top 5%, even wells
with counts greater than 2. As a result all cultures were discarded.

  

  

Figure 1: Heat map of plate 9378 highlighting the top 95% of cultures based on
cell counts of the Hoechst stained wells. This plate was seeded with cultures
belonging to the 8639 DOLLY_12 fibroblast culture.

  

Figure 2: Heat map of plate 9379 highlighting the top 95% of cultures based on
cell counts of the Hoechst stained wells. This plate was seeded with cultures
belonging to the 8639 DOLLY_12 fibroblast culture.

Figure 3: Heat map of plate 9380 highlighting the top 95% of cultures based on
cell counts of the Hoechst stained wells. This plate was seeded with cultures
belonging to the 8640 DOLLY_12 fibroblast culture.

Figure 4: Heat map of plate 9381 highlighting the top 95% of cultures based on
cell counts of the Hoechst stained wells. This plate was seeded with cultures
belonging to the 8640 DOLLY_12 fibroblast culture.

Figure 5: Heat map of plate 9382 highlighting the top 95% of cultures based on
cell counts of the Hoechst stained wells. This plate was seeded with cultures
belonging to the 8641 DOLLY_12 fibroblast culture.

  

Figure 6: Heat map of plate 9383 highlighting the top 95% of cultures based on
cell counts of the Hoechst stained wells. This plate was seeded with cultures
belonging to the 8641 DOLLY_12 fibroblast culture.


Limitations:


All previous SCC cloning attempts sort cells that originate from adherent
cultures. As the cells can be monitored whilst they are in adherent
conditions, we have a high degree of confidence that the cells that are FACS
sorted are indeed viable and will continue to proliferate after being seeded
into a 384 well plate. Unfortunately, we were unable to determine if these
suspension cells were still alive and capable of proliferation prior to
subjecting them to the FACS and cloning process. Therefore we may have
potentially sorted cells that were unlikely to proliferate in 384 ULA plates.


Conclusion:


Of the three cultures that were FACS sorted into 384 ULA plates, no plate
contained cell that proliferated over the ~40 days in culture. It is unclear
if the cells that were taken from the existing suspension cultures were a
viable population capable of proliferation to begin with, prior to FACS
sorting. Therefore, it appears more appropriate to FACS sort adherent
populations into 384 ULA plates unless the cell population is confirmed to be
suspension adapted.


Future Directions:


  * Perform FACS sorting of cells that have been confirmed as being suspension adapted if they are required to be cloned instead of cell population currently being attempted to be adapted.


