

While it is hard to be prescriptive with what a report should contain, there
are a few common points that all reports should consider. A report should
(almost) replicate the "Discussion" section of a journal article. The
following is a ROUGH guide with a suggested paragraph structure. PLEASE ensure
to include references to previously published work (or links to work conducted
here at Vow).

  1. What is the most important overarching finding? 
  2. A brief discussion of all results and how they fit into our final goal of producing an edible meat product (this section might be several paragraphs long and should put the results into the context of what has been done before). 
  3. Any limitations of the study, why might our results not be correct? 
  4. What is the overall conclusion? 
  5. Discussion of future directions.

***PLEASE NOTE, YOUR REPORT SHOULD BE FINALISED WITHIN TWO WEEKS OF COMPLETING
ALL EXPERIMENTAL WORK.***  

  




Note: The TGFb used in this experiment was not reconstituted according to the
manufacturer's instructions which may have impacted results.

Key Findings & Discussion

  

n = 139-207, ordinary one-way ANOVA + Tukey, **p≤0.01, ****p≤0.0001
n=201-210, ordinary one-way ANOVA + Tukey, ****p≤0.0001n=116-203, ordinary
one-way ANOVA + Tukey, *p≤0.05, ****p≤0.0001



  

We have performed a similar experiment before (EPIC16049) which looked that
the baseline adhesion and proliferation of cells in microcarrier culture. That
experiment was performed in 6 well plates, rather than E125 flasks and showed
that cells could adhere to microcarriers in ACF media in a way that was
comparable to serum. In EPIC16049, we did not observe proliferation of cells
over 4 days for any media conditions. However, in this experiment, by day 4,
there were significant differences between serum and ACF media in terms of
cells/microcarrier. By day 7, E89C seems to have the highest
cells/microcarrier from the ACF media conditions but it is still significantly
lower than serum.

This was the first time we had attempted to harvest cells grown in ACF media.
During the harvest, the E125 flasks had toppled over during shaking with
trypsin. This could have impacted the ability of trypsin to detach cells from
microcarriers. Next time we should use shakers with clamps to hold these
flasks in place during rigorous shaking. We have noticed in adherent culture
that cells in ACF often require more time in Tryple than cells in serum. It's
likely that this would also be the case for cells in suspension. However, this
was difficult to observe in this experiment as the number of cells attached to
microcarriers in ACF media was so low even before the harvest.

Our preliminary results suggest that protease inhibitor cocktail can be used
for neutralising trypsin during a harvest for microcarrier culture. This would
remove the use of serum-containing media for this step. We kept cells that
underwent this process in culture for 2 days. During this time we did not
observe any difference in cells/microcarrier between cultures that had been
seeded after being neutralised with serum based media versus cultures that
were neutralised with protease inhibitor. However, these results are only from
1 biological replicate for each condition and for 2 days only so these results
need to be confirmed with further testing.

Limitations and future directions

In this experiment, we started adding 1% P188 to our ACF cultures on day 4 of
proliferation. P188 is known to reduce the shear stress on cells and we
hypothesised this would be particularly helpful for ACF conditions in the
absence of serum. In future experiments, we should include P188 in our ACF
suspension cultures from the beginning.

We only used 1 biological replicate for each media condition. This is because
currently microcarrier culture in E125 flasks requires a lot of cells, media,
and manual handling. It is also time consuming to harvest these cultures which
makes it difficult to perform experiments with a larger number of replicates
and conditions. Therefore, we will explore culturing cells in 50mL tube spins
which have a working volume of 10 mL rather than the 30mL that is required for
E125 flasks, with the goal of making microcarrier culture more high-
throughput.

Recently, the cell availability project has created 'Taipan' to improve the
number of cells that are harvested from microcarriers. It consists of a
syringe connected to a tube with an opening that is covered by a mesh. This
mesh allows cells to go through but traps microcarriers. It allows us to
easily separate cells from microcarriers once they've undergone trypsin
detachment. Therefore, future harvesting trials will likely involve using
Taipan.

It is hypothesised that when we use a heterogenous population to seed
microcarriers (as we have been doing in ACF media experiments), cell
numbers/microcarrier will not increase initially because some cells in the
population may not be able to adapt to suspension culture.  Only those that
can adapt will survive and then proliferate. This introduces a source of
variability in our experiments where the population seeded in one flask may
have more cells capable of adapting to suspension than another. To address
this, the cell accessibility project has developed clones that are adapted to
suspension. We should consider using these for future experiments to improve
consistency between different experimental conditions and between different
experiments.

Conclusion

Cells did not proliferate on Cytodex microcarriers in ACF media. Using
protease inhibitor cocktail for neutralising trypsin may be a good alternative
to using serum based media for neutralisation. We will need to develop high-
throughput methods of culturing microcarriers to test more media conditions
and harvesting methods in the future.

  


