

While it is hard to be prescriptive with what a report should contain, there
are a few common points that all reports should consider. A report should
(almost) replicate the "Discussion" section of a journal article. The
following is a ROUGH guide with a suggested paragraph structure. PLEASE ensure
to include references to previously published work (or links to work conducted
here at Vow).

  1. What is the most important overarching finding? 
  2. A brief discussion of all results and how they fit into our final goal of producing an edible meat product (this section might be several paragraphs long and should put the results into the context of what has been done before). 
  3. Any limitations of the study, why might our results not be correct? 
  4. What is the overall conclusion? 
  5. Discussion of future directions.

***PLEASE NOTE, YOUR REPORT SHOULD BE FINALISED WITHIN TWO WEEKS OF COMPLETING
ALL EXPERIMENTAL WORK.***  

  




Note: The TGFb used in this experiment was not reconstituted according to the
manufacturer's instructions which may have impacted results.

Method summary

DOLLY12 cells were thawed into gelatin coated flasks in serum containing media
and seeded at a density of 1000 cells/cm^2. The following day, a 100% feed was
performed to put cells into different media conditions:

  * serum (DMEM/F12 + 20% FBS + 1x P/S + 10uM p38i)
  * E810C
  * E810C + extra ethanolamine + extra p38i
  * E810C w/o GABA
  * E810C w/o GABA, EGF, LIF, + extra ethanolamine, p38i, IL-6, IGF-LR3

Cells were then fed every ~48 h and passaged every 3-4 days.

Key findings

At the first passage, there was already a notable difference between cell
counts from ACF media versus serum containing media. In the second passage,
the cell counts obtained for cells in ACF media were lower than the amount of
cells that had been seeded. Monitoring these cells under the microscope over
the next 2-3 days indicated that cells numbers were still very low and that
these media conditions were not sufficiently supporting cell growth.
Therefore, after 9 days of culture in the respective media conditions, all
flasks were discarded.

Images of flasks from the day 8 (4x, Phase) are below:

  

serumE810C





  

  

E810C without GABAE810C + extra ethanolamine and p38i





  

  

E810C without GABA, EGF, LIF and with extra ethanolamine and p38i



Discussion

In this experiment, our serum control performed as expected. However, our ACF
baseline control E810C decreased in cell numbers after 2 passages. This is
unusual compared to what we've seen before. In EPIC10575 we performed
continuous culture with several ACF conditions (including E810C) and observed
cell growth over several passages, and eventually reached 10 doublings. It's
unclear what caused this occur. Perhaps there was a mistake with the
preparation of ACF media and repeating this experiment would yield different
results. Specifically, the FGFb used in this experiment came from a different
brand (Reprokine), rather than PeproTech. Further investigation to confirm
whether this caused poor growth needs to be performed.

Amongst the ACF conditions, it appears that E810C performed better than others
(based on cell counts from the 2nd passage). This was also unexpected as we
anticipated that the addition of extra ethanolamine and p38i based on the
results of DSD#1 (i.e. EPIC12970) would increase proliferation. This could be
because the ACF media bullet used in EPIC12970 did not contain all the
ingredients that are found in E810C. Therefore, the interaction of ingredients
and their combinatorial effect on cells was different.

Limitations

Because the cells in ACF media did not proliferate as expected, we were not
able to test the downstream effect of these media on differentiation of cells.

Future directions

We should explore other ACF media formulations to find media that better
support cell doublings in long-term culture of muscle stem cells. Therefore,
we will test the use of 'Beefy-9' media that was described by Stout et al 2021
for our cells. In addition, we will test the passaging method detailed in the
paper which involved the delayed addition of albumin to ACF media to allow
better adhesion of cells. We will also test the use of coatings such as
vitronectin or laminin. See EPIC 19442 for details.


