

Preparation of Konjac

  

Materials

  * gums: Konjac powder, baking soda
  * solvents: milliQ water
  * glassware/plates: 1 magnetic stir bars, 1 x 500 mL glass beakers for heating formulations, 1x 24w plates, 1x 150mL beaker for washing gels, scalple, heating plate, specimen jar

  

  

Formulation 1:

  1. Placed 125 mL of MilliQ water and magnetic stirrer in a 200 mL beaker
  2. Added 0.25g baking powder for one minute 
  3. Added 1.5g Konjac Glucomannan powder and stirred continuously until liquid reaches a boil. (tried with 3g next time)
  4. Allowed solution to heat up to 100 degrees for 3 minutes before removing from the heat and allowing to cool slightly.
  5. Transferred into 6 well-plate and place in fridge to cool
  6.  ~~After gel has has cooled and formed, cut gel into small pieces and dip into water or steam for 3 - 5 minutes.~~
  7.  ~~Removed from water and place in schotte bottle (or beaker in a autoclave bag) for autoclaving.~~

  

Observation

1\. Upon executing this method the first time, the sample was burnt at the
base of the beaker. This occured as the magnetic stiere was unable to move in
the konjac solution which has thicken.

2\. Upon executing this method for the second time, the sample when poured
into the 6-well plate, did not harden and form a soil gel even after
refrigeration.

  

  

  

Formulation 2:

  * Add 5g Konjac powder to 500 mL beaker 

  * Add 475ml water to beaker and place on hot plate. 

  * stir till a gentle boil, then turn off flame.

  * Keep stirring for about 5 minutes, till the liquid doesn't have too many fine bubbles

  * Add 1/16 tsp (0.2375g) citric acid stir well

  * Pour into mould. 

  * Chill in refrigerator for 3 hours before removing from the mould.

  

  

  




Preparation of Konjac:

  

Method:

  1. Place 500 mL of MilliQ water and magnetic stirer in a 500 mL beaker
  2. Heat water on a heat plate (with a magnetic stierer option) until tempratures reach 85 degrees
  3. In a specimen jar, combine 12 g  of konjac glucomannan with ~~¼ teaspoon of pickling lime (a food grade calcium hydroxide) or~~ 1.2 g baking soda and mix powder well
  4. Transfer powder into the heated water, making sure the solution is mixing continuously.

Results:

Liquid immediately gelled up when over 6g of Konjac powder was added. As a
result, stir bar was unable to move and a thin layer of the gel was burnt.
Sample discarded.  

  

Repeat:

  1. Place 500 mL of MilliQ water and magnetic stirer in a 500 mL beaker
  2. Heat water on a heat plate (with a magnetic stierer option) until tempratures reach 85 degrees
  3. In a specimen jar, combine 5 g  of konjac glucomannan with 0.5 g baking soda and mix powder well
  4. Transfer powder into the heated water, making sure the solution is mixing continuously.
  5. Allow solution to heat up to 100 degrees for 3 minutes before removing from the heat and allowing to cool slightly.
    1. Sample was heated above 95 degrees for over 20 minutes. Unable to reach 100 degrees.
  6. Transfer into desired vessel tube, well-plate) 11:45 am
  7. After gel has has cooled and formed, cut gel into small pieces and dip into water or steam for 3 - 5 minutes.
  8. Remove from water and place in schotte bottle (or beaker in a autoclave bag?) for autoclaving.

  * Gather materials

    * gums: Konjac powder, baking soda
    * solvents: milliQ water
    * glassware/plates: 1 magnetic stir bars, 1 x 500 mL glass beakers for heating formulations, 1x 24w plates, 1x 150mL beaker for washing gels, scalple, heating plate, specimen jar




Observation:

Konjac samples prepared using the above method were deemed unusable. The
Konjac did not form a solid gel, even upon cooling. Rather it thickened but
remained liquid. The consistency was similar to flowing lava or honey. It is
expected that this is the result of a missing components or cross-linker. For
future directions, a more suitable crosslinker should be used eg curdlin.
Konjac power can also be mixed with purple zien powder or other components
which may allow it for thicken and form a solid gel. Alternatively, Konjac in
solid form can be store bought. The aim is to test if the material can support
cell growth, therefore rather than spending time trying to formulate a
scaffold that holds it shape, it may be more ideal to purchase a commercially
available product and test on this as a proof of concept before creating the
scaffold in house.

  


