

## Completed by: AK


Aim/Purpose


Determine if the addition of Vitamin C (L-ascorbic acid) during cell seeding
or post 4 days after seeding, affects the proliferation and/or aggregation of
Nuvonis quail fibroblast suspension cells.


Hypothesis


Inclusion of Vitamin C (L-ascorbic acid) during cell seeding will increase the
proliferation rate of Nuvonis suspension cells. In addition it's addition
after the cells have been in culture for 3 days post seeding will result in
the formation of aggregates and production of ECM mass.


Technical Gap


Previous experimental with DOLLY_12 and CHOMP_09 fibroblasts demonstrated that
treating cells with Vitamin C (L-ascorbic acid) resulted in enhancing the
production of ECM protein and subsequent aggregation of adherent cultures. In
addition this aggregation resulted in a texture that was more meat-like during
the product team testing demonstrations. Replicating this finding with quail
fibroblast cells in suspension can result in a greater product yield due to
the increase in ECM production. Therefore, this proof of concept experiment
will determine if the addition of Vitamin C during seeding or post seeding is
sufficient to increase the cells proliferation rate and cause an increase in
ECM production.


Method/Procedure


Process:

Growth medium:

Freestyle 293 medium supplemented with:

• Difco Yeast Extract UF, 1g/l: add 10 ml YE stock (100g/l) per liter medium

• L-Ornithine monohydrochloride, 20 mg/l; add 1 ml stock (20 mg/ml) per liter
medium

• Putrescine dihydrochloride, 20 mg/ml; add 1 ml stock (20 mg/ml) per liter
medium

• IGF-1 LONG R3, 50 μg/l; add 50 μl stock (1 mg/ml) per liter medium

• EGF, 10 μg/l; add 10 μl stock (1 mg/ml) per liter medium

• Anti-clumping agent, 1:100; add 10 ml stock per liter medium

  

Treatment groups: Vitamin C (L-ascorbic acid 50 ug/mL)

  

  1. Seed 9x E125 flask at 50K cells/mL with Nuvonis quail fibroblast suspension cells in the following conditions:
    1. Control group (n=3, no treatment, seeded in the standard growth medium, see above)
    2. Treatment group (n=3, group treated with Vitamin C post 3 days harvest and monitored for 48 hrs)
    3. Treatment group (n=3, group seeded in Vitamin C and harvested after 4 days
  2. Sample each condition for cell count
  3. Post 3 days after seeding add Vitamin C (50 ug/mL) to treatment condition group 2.
  4. Monitor treatment group 2 for 48 hours, noting any observations
  5. After 48 hrs of treatment harvest treatment group 1 and 2 weighing the final pellet mass, to determine difference in weight

Make a drawing of this


