Key Result(s)


  * No significant difference in pellet weight of treated conditions compared to the control; p=9707 (Control vs Vitamin C seeded) and p=9690 (Control vs Vitamin C treated).
  * No significant difference in pellet weight between Vitamin C seeded cultures and Vitamin C treated cultures (p=0.8865). 


Discussion of Results


Previous experiments have determined that the addition of L-ascorbic acid
(Vitamin C) in conjunction to TGF-B results in a significant increase in ECM
production by sheep and crocodile fibroblasts. This directly results in the
formation of the characteristic "aggregates" used in product development.
Including these reagents during the final stages of a fibroblast batch
dramatically increases to yield to approximately 10g per 10 layer cell stack.
As a result this experiment sought to determine if the addition of Vit C could
replicate similar findings in Nuvonis suspension fibroblast cultures. In
addition to the control, 2 other experimental conditions were evaluated. Cells
were either initially seeded in growth media containing Vitamin C or in was
included in media 3 days after culture seeding. All cultures were monitored
over 7 days and harvested, with each cell pelleted weighed.

  

One way anova analysis of results indicated that the weight of the cell
pellets did not differ significantly compared to the control; p=9707 (Control
vs Vitamin C seeded) and p=9690 (Control vs Vitamin C treated) (Figure 1).
Additionally there was no significant difference in seeding cells in Vitamin C
or treating them after 3 days (p=0.8865). Despite the Vitamin C treated
condition having a higher average pellet mass compared to the control the
variance in results from both the Vitamin C seeded and Vitamin C treated,
resulted in larger error bars compared to the control (Figure 1).

  

Figure 1: Weight of harvested Nuvonis cell pellets. Each data point represents
an individual sample with the average calculated from triplicate samples (n=3)
+/- SEM.


Limitations


  * It is inconclusive to determine if Vitamin C treating or seeding results in a higher cell pellet weight due to the variances observed between technical replicates. 


Conclusion(s)


No significant differences were observed between any of the conditions
evaluated. Moreover, it is inconclusive to determine if Vitamin C treating or
seeding results in a higher cell pellet weight due to the variances observed
between technical replicates.


Future Direction(s)


  * Repeat this experiment with additional technical replicates to determine if the variance observed between replicates is an effect of the Vitamin C.
  * Increase the duration the cells are cultured in Vitamin C, >7 days.
  * Treat cultures with cell density >1M cells/mL with Vitamin C over an extended period, > 7 days. 


