Key Result(s)


  * Nuvonis fibroblast cells were able to survive and proliferate in Hycell CHO medium reconstituted in reverse osmosis, industrial distilled and tap water  
  * Limited cell growth was observed in growth medium reconstituted in ultrapure distilled
  * Cells grown in the MilliQ condition exhibited the highest total cell counts and lowest doubling times, followed by tap, ID, RO and finally UD


Discussion of Results


This study sought to investigate if the Nuvonis quail fibroblast cells could
survive and proliferate in Hycell CHO medium reconstituted in different water
types. A total of 5 water types were utilised with MilliQ representing the
cell culture grade standard. In addition, industrial distilled (ID), reverse
osmosis (RO), ultrapure distilled (UD) and standard tap water were evaluated.

  

During the first 6 days of the culturing period all conditions, except the
ultrapure distilled were characterised by cell growth. On average the MilliQ
control exhibited the highest total cell count closely followed by tap, ID and
RO respectively (Figure 1). As mentioned previously cells cultured in the UD
water type exhibited very little cell growth, with majority of the cells
staining positive for trypan blue during the hemocytometer counts (Figure 1).
Cells continued to proliferate until day 9, with MilliQ remaining with the
highest cell count, seconded by the tap water treatment (Figure 1). Both the
RO and ID treatments continued to proliferate with slightly lower total cell
numbers compared to the MilliQ and tap water conditions (Figure 1). Similar to
day 6, the UD was hallmarked by very little growth, with one flask displaying
complete cell death (Figure 1). Comparison of average doublings times across
the 9 day culturing period highlighted that the MilliQ had the lowest doubling
time of approximately 36 hours. In contrast the UD flasks doubled roughly
every 95 hours, whereas the RO, ID and tap treatments doubled every 42, 40,
and 37 hours respectively (Figure 2).

  

  

Figure 1: Proliferation of Nuvonis quail fibroblast cells in growth medium
reconstituted in different water types. Each data point represents the average
for n=2 for each condition +/- SEM.

  

Figure 2: Average doubling times of Nuvonis quail fibroblast cells in growth
medium reconstituted in different water types. Each data point represents one
sample +/- SEM.


Limitations


  * This experiment did not include sufficient technical replicates to perform statistical analysis. As such, it can not be stated if one condition performed better or worse than another condition with only an n=2, only that the cells were able to survive/proliferate in those water types. n ≥ 3 remains the gold standard for statistical analysis. 


Conclusion(s)


Nuvonis quail fibroblasts were able to survive and proliferate in 3 of the
water types testing, including ID, RO and tap. Unfortunately cells grown in
growth medium reconstituted in UD water exhibited either very little growth or
mass cell death. Cells grown in MilliQ had the highest total cell numbers and
the lowest doubling times, followed by tap, ID, RO and finally UD.


Future Direction(s)


  * Repeat with sufficient technical replicates (n ≥ 3) for statistical analysis to determine the performance of different water types relative to the control conditions.


