

While it is hard to be prescriptive with what a report should contain, there
are a few common points that all reports should consider. A report should
(almost) replicate the "Discussion" section of a journal article. The
following is a ROUGH guide with a suggested paragraph structure. PLEASE ensure
to include references to previously published work (or links to work conducted
here at Vow).

  1. What is the most important overarching finding? 
  2. A brief discussion of all results and how they fit into our final goal of producing an edible meat product (this section might be several paragraphs long and should put the results into the context of what has been done before). 
  3. Any limitations of the study, why might our results not be correct? 
  4. What is the overall conclusion? 
  5. Discussion of future directions.

***PLEASE NOTE, YOUR REPORT SHOULD BE FINALISED WITHIN TWO WEEKS OF COMPLETING
ALL EXPERIMENTAL WORK.***  

  


Brief background


The serial passaging and expansion of myogenic stem cells has not been
demonstrated using Trypsin to harvest cells from Cytodex 1 microcarriers. This
is essential information for the science and production teams in order to have
confidence in the use of this method for everyday culture purposes. More data
is required on harvest process consistency, as efficiencies with the Trypsin
method have ranged between 20% and 80% recently.

A heterogeneous myogenic stem cell line, DOLLY12, was expanded from E125 to
E250. The culture conditions were as standard at Vow: fill volume ~25% of
nominal volume, microcarrier concentration 4.5 mg/mL (or 19.8 cm2/mL or 19,350
microcarriers/mL), seeding density ~3 cells/microcarrier (~3,000 cells/cm2),
harvest density ~12 cells/microcarrier (~12,000 cells/cm2).

Cells are detached from the microcarriers by shaking incubation in Trypsin for
10-15 minutes. Due to the much faster sedimentation rate of the microcarriers,
they can be allowed to settle while most of the cells remain in the
supernatant. The supernatant can then be decanted and centrifuged, and a cell
pellet recovered.


Key results


Serial culture was difficult because the harvest efficiency was below 50% in
the cultures tested here. Countable cell numbers enabling harvest efficiency
calculation were harvested from only 2 flasks, which are presented here.

Flask 6461 was seeded with 0.864 million cells, harvested on day 7 at 5.86
million cells, and 2.82 million cells were recovered during the harvest (see
Figures 1(a) and (c)). This equates to a harvest efficiency of 48.1% (see
Figure 1(d)). Poloxamer 188 solution at 100 g/L was used to wash the
microcarriers after Trypsinization. It was hypothesized that the Poloxamer
would coat both the cells and the microcarriers, shielding the electric charge
attraction between the harvested cells and the microcarriers, thereby
improving recovery from the microcarriers.

Flask 6646 was seeded with 12.5 million cells, harvested on day 4 at 16.60
million cells, and 1.76 million cells were recovered during the harvest (see
Figures 1(b) and (c)) . This equates to a harvest efficiency of 10.6 % (see
Figure 1(d)). This was despite using Poloxamer 188 solution at 100 g/L to wash
the microcarriers after Trypsinization. Post-harvest micrographs showed many
cells with spherical morphology on the surface of the microcarriers (Figure 1
(e) and (f)).

  

Figure 1: Micrographs of blue fluorescent nuclei on microcarriers, taken
before harvest using a Basler camera on a Zeiss Axiovert microscope with 5x
objective, from culture 6461 (a) and 6646 (b). Time series of cell counts from
seeding to post-harvest (c). Harvest efficiencies calculated from the pre- and
post-harvest cell counts (d). Micrographs of microcarriers from culture 6646
taken after harvest, phase contrast (e) and blue fluorescence (f).  




Discussion


The harvest efficiency was below 50% in both cases for which pre- and post-
harvest counts were available (as presented in Figure 1). This was despite the
use of a 1 g/L or greater Poloxamer 188 concentration, which has been shown to
coat microcarriers and other surfaces, thereby preventing sticking by charge
interaction. This was probably due to the cells being attracted to and
remaining entrained in the microcarrier pellet after sedimentation, as
inferred from Figures 1 (e) and (f). The spherical, rather than spread or
elongated, morphology of the cells, even those on the surfaces of the
microcarriers, implies that physical detachment was mostly or totally
complete, and that increased Trypsin concentration and/or incubation time
would not improve the harvest.

Electrostatic attraction is the first and most important force in the initial
stages of cell adhesion (Khalili and Ahmad, 2015). This electrostatic adhesion
is governed largely by the opposing forces of electrostatic interaction and
fluid shear; as shear rate increases, the probability that a particle will
stick to a surface decreases (Schwarze et al., 2019). Assuming that a cell
does stick by electrostatic attraction, cells of all types (both animal and
microbial) will begin to consolidate the adhesion by physical attachment in
under an hour (Khalili and Ahmad, 2015; Boks et al., 2008). At this point, the
force required to detach the cell will be much greater than the force required
to prevent the cell from attaching in the first place. Therefore, in order to
prevent cells from re-attaching to the microcarriers after the Trypsinization
process, the electrostatic interaction needs to be eliminated, and/or a
physical force that can overcome the electrostatic force needs to be provided.

Increased agitation and/or agitation during the aspiration of the detached
cells, may be required to form and maintain a single cell suspension. Shear
rates of over 800 s-1 (Boks et al., 2008) or shear stresses of over 1 dyn/cm2
(Schwarze et al., 2019) appear to prevent attachment of small (~5 micron
diameter) cells to surfaces such as glass. Agitation that generates these
shear forces could be adequate for preventing cells from reattaching to the
microcarriers. However, in order for the microcarriers to settle and the cells
to be decanted, the agitation would need to stop, so this method is only
feasible if the cells can be separated by size exclusion or some other
property, rather than on the basis of differential sedimentation rates.

The modification of the surface charge of the cell membrane is also possible;
positively charged polymers, poly-cations, and nanoparticles have all been
used to counteract the negative charge of the cell membrane (Davis et al.,
2019). Poly-L-lysine (PLL) is a polycation that has successfully been used to
create a short-term positive charge on the surface of the cell with no
evidence of lasting detrimental effects to the cell (Ribeiro et al., 2017).
This method could be useful in differential sedimentation, size exclusion and
possibly even other cell separation methods.

  


Limitations


There were several limitations with this experiment:

  * Incomplete data was collected for each of the cultures - micrographs of the Hoechst-stained nuclei on the microcarriers were not taken for all key timepoints (day 1, pre-harvest, post-harvest), which severely limited the number of harvests available for comparison.
  * The harvests were performed on different days by different operators.
  * The harvests were performed with different culture volumes and cell densities.
  * Cell counts were by Trypan blue exclusion method and Neubauer hemocytometer, except for pre-harvest, which was by estimation from average nuclei per microcarrier count. So, the cell counts are not directly comparable but indicative only. Therefore, the calculated harvest efficiencies are also only indicative.


Conclusion


Serial passaging by Trypsinization and expansion of MuSC cells on Cytodex 1
microcarriers was not successfully demonstrated. The harvest efficiencies were
generally so low that the same number or fewer numbers of cells were recovered
after harvest than were seeded into the culture. Post-harvest micrographs
suggest that many cells remain entrained in the microcarrier mass such that,
after sedimentation, a minority of the cells remain in the supernatant. This
is most likely exacerbated by the strong electrostatic interaction between the
positively charged microcarriers and the negatively charged cells.


Future Direction(s)


  * Future harvest improvements will be conducted during the expansion of clones, which are higher priority than the heterogeneous populations of the pre-clone banks.
  * Increased and/or continuous shear should be tested to counteract the electrostatic attraction between cells and microcarriers, and thereby prevent re-attachment of cells to microcarriers after Trypsinization
  * Positively-charge polycations such as Poly-L-lysine should be tested to temporarily interrupt the negative charge of the cells, and thereby prevent re-attachment of cells to microcarriers after Trypsinization 

  


References


Khalili, A. A., & Ahmad, M. R. (2015). A Review of cell adhesion studies for
biomedical and biological applications. International Journal of Molecular
Sciences, 16(8), 18149-18184\. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms160818149

Schwarze, J., Grunze, M., Karahka, M., & Kreuzer, H. J. (2019). Attachment and
Detachment of Particles from a Surface under Shear Flow. Journal of Physical
Chemistry C, 123(13), 8153-8159\. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b08215

Boks, N. P., Norde, W., van der Mei, H. C., & Busscher, H. J. (2008). Forces
involved in bacterial adhesion to hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces.
Microbiology, 154(10), 3122-3133\. https://doi.org/10.1099/mic.0.2008/018622-0

Davis, K. A., Wu, P.-J., Cahall, C. F., Li, C., Gottipati, A., & Berron, B. J.
(2019). Coatings on mammalian cells: interfacing cells with their environment.
Journal of Biological Engineering, 13(1), 1-28\.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13036-018-0131-6

Ribeiro, R. D. C., Pal, D., Jamieson, D., Rankin, K. S., Benning, M.,
Dalgarno, K. W., & Ferreira, A. M. (2017). Temporary Single-Cell Coating for
Bioprocessing with a Cationic Polymer. ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces,
9(15), 12967-12974\. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.6b16434


